High-Side Attack
In any attack, the rate of turn which an attacker needs to track a target
may be expressed as radial G, and can be shown by the following formula:
N=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ
32.2 S

The radial G expressed here represents the lateral acceleration of the
fighter in the horizontal plane. It does not represent the total G on the
aircraft, since it neglects the pull of gravity (1G). Total G is the resultant
of radial G and 1G pull of gravity acting through the vertical axis of the
aircraft. This total G determines angle of attack – the angle between the
mean chord line and the relative wind. Since total G determines angle of
attack, the aircraft stalls on total G. In view of this fact, and because our
previous formula considered only radial G, we must determine the exact
relationship between total and radial G. It may be expressed as follows:
Gt2 = Gr2 + 1
Where
Gt = Total G
Gr = Radial G
1 = 1 G gravity
We can see, by the formula, that total G will always be greater than radial
G. This is a disadvantage, because the rate of turn which an attacker needs
to track a target, or the range to which an attacker can approach a target is
dependent upon radial G, not total G. This disadvantage becomes less at
higher G values because the difference between total and radial G is less.
Example:
If Gt = 4
Gr = Gt − 1 = 16 − 1 = 3.87
If Gt = 1
Gr = Gt − 1 = 4 − 1 = 1.73
The difference between 2 and 1.73 = .27 whereas the difference between 4
and 3.87 = .13
Since a greater difference exist between Gt and Gr at lower G values, the
rate of turn is reduced not only because less total G is available, but also
because an even greater loss of radial G is experienced.
18

The Overhead Attack
The overhead attack, as compared to the high-side or level attack, has
the apparent advantage of maintaining airspeed and G because the thrust
vector and gravity act together to provide a greater total force. However,
to determine whether or not there is a real advantage, let’s examine the
difference between rate of turn (GR) and total G. To digress, let’s assume
that an aircraft is in straight-and-level flight. How many G will show on
the G-meter? One G. Now, let’s assume that an aircraft is in straight-andlevel flight, but upside down. How many G will show on the G-meter? One
negative G. Now remembering these relationships, let’s note the total and
radial G relationships at four points around a loop – the pull-up, the 90°
point, the 180° point, and the 270° point. For example: let’s assume that the
aircraft is pulling 4 total G at the pull up as illustrated in figure 10. How
many radial G is it pulling? Three. Then, in effect, we have added 3 G to
the 1G needed for straight-and-level flight, to give us 4 total G at pull-up.
At the 90° point,when pulling 4 total G, we will also be pulling 4 radial G.
At this point, gravity is 90° from our vertical axis, thereby exerting no pull
along this axis — instead, it is a drag factor action 180° from the aircraft
line of flight. At the 180° point, when we are pulling 4 total G, we will have
5 radial G, thereby giving us a turn rate – at a given airspeed – greater than
at any other point on the loop. In other words, as compared to the pull-up,
gravity (1G) acts in the opposite direction, therefore gravity must add to,
rather than subtract from total G, to provide a greater radial G. At the 270°
point, once again, total G equals radial G except that gravity acts in the
same direction as the aircraft line of flight. From the 270° point on, radial
G diminishes in relation to total G until the pull-up point is reached. At
this point we again have 1G difference between total and radial G.
In an overhead attack, to determine the difference between total and
radial G, we may use the following formula:
Gt = Gr + Cosθ
Where
Gt = Total G
Gr = Radial G
Cosθ = Cosine of the angle-off
It is obvious, from the formula, that the relationship between total and
radial G is considerably different from that experienced in a high-side pass.
Example:
In a Level Pass where Gt = 4,
Gr = 16 − 1 = 3.87

19

Figure 10

20

In an Overhead Pass at 30° angle-off where Gt = 4
Gr = Gt - Cosθ or Gr = 4 - .866 = 3.14
As shown in the example above, if an attacker is force to fire inside an
opponent’s maximum performance cone – at angles of less than 30° – this
means that from .866 to 1 more G, above radio G, is necessary to track
a given target. Thus, as compared to a high-side attack, even though an
attacker may have an apparent advantage in maintaining higher G, it is
largely wiped out by the greater difference between radial and total G. The
important thing to keep in mind here is that the overhead attack offers no
significant advantages over the high-side attack.
Underside Attack
The Underside Attack provides an effect just opposite that illustrated
in the overhead pass. Here, an attacker generates a radial G higher than
total G upon his aircraft (you will recall that in the top half of the loop,
radial G is greater than total G) and may be expressed by the following
formula:
Gt = Gr - Cosθ
If we assume the same attack conditions as illustrated in the overhead pass
– 30° angle-off, 4 total G – we get the following results:
Gr = 4 + .866 or
Gr = 4.866
In terms of G, this attack seems to provide an apparent advantage, however
this does not always hold true. For example: If an attacker performed
an underside attack in an F-100, he would experience a rapid speed
decay, because of gravity as well as induced drag. As a result, since speed
determines G available, the attacker would have much less total G. In
addition, because of airspeed decay, the attacker would diminish the
fighter-target ratio. As a consequence, the attacker’s max-G point would be
forced farther out – in angle-off, and range – causing a further reduction in
both total and radial G. As a result, the F-100 would not gain appreciably
by this attack, since total G available is reduced sufficiently to cancel out
the advantage of a higher radial G. However, if this same attack were
executed in an aircraft with a very high power-to-weight ratio and a lowdrag profile – such as the F-104 – the attack could be invaluable, since high
speed decay and G bleed-off would not occur.

21

Nose Quarter Attack
A nose-quarter attack is ineffective for the following two reasons:
1. We cannot launch the Aim-9B missile from this position, because
of the missile’s IR limitations.
2. In a gun attack from a nose-quarter position, we can avoid the
defensive-fire coverage of a given bomber. However, in this type attack, the
rate of closure becomes so high that an attacker cannot deliver an effective
burst and avoid a collision with a target. For these two reasons, we will not
consider this attack further.
THE BEST TYPE ATTACK AGAINST A NON-MANEUVERING
TARGET WITH AIM-9B
To determine the best type attack to employ with the missile, let’s first
examine the possible attacks which we may employ with this equipment.
There are four basic sidewinder attacks which we may employ.
1. Overhead Attack
2. The High-side Attack
3. The Six-O’clock Attack
4. The Underside Attack
Overhead Attack
The Overhead Attack has two basic disadvantages – IR and G. As
you will recall, IR tone contrast against sunlight-reflective background –
clouds, and ground – forces us to diminish our effective slant range, until
we are approximately 6000’ to 8000’ from our target. This IR limitation,
combined with the 2G limitation, allows an attacker to fire only at low
angles off. To illustrate, by figure 11, if an attacker pulls 2G inside an
opponent’s cone of max performance – angular velocity cone – he will
generate a radial G considerably different than the total G on the G meter.
For example, at 30° angle-off, applying the formula Gt - Gr + Cosθ, we
find that the attacker is only able to generate 1.134 Gr.

22

For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Vt = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Gt = 2
θ = 10°, 20°, 30°
Gr @ 10° = 2 - .985 = 1.015
Gr @ 20° = 2 - .94 = 1.06
Gr @ 30° = 2 - .866 = 1.134
For θ = 10°
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 23700 × Sin θ 23, 700 × .174
=
=
= 4.060
32.2Gr
Gr
1.015

For θ = 20°
S=

23, 700 × .342
= 7.650
1.06

For θ = 30°
S=

23, 700 × .5
= 10.450
1.134
Figure 11

At 20° angle-off, applying the same formula, we find that the attacker can generate
1.06 Gr. At 10° angle-off, he can generate only 1.015 Gr. Now let’s assume that
the fighter making this attack is going .9 Mach against a .9 Mach target at 35,000’.
Applying the formula:
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ
32.2 N

Where
Vf = .9 Mach or 873’ / S
Vt = .9 Mach or 873’ / S
Sine of 30° = .5
N = 1.134
we find that, at 30° angle-off, an attacker can get no closer than 10,450’. At 20° angleoff – where Sinθ = .342 and N = 1.06 – we find that an attacker can get no closer
than 7,650’. At 10° angle off, using the same procedure, we find that an attacker can
get no closer than 4,060’. Since an attacker cannot receive proper IR discrimination
at ranges greater than 6000 to 8000 feet, he will be forced to launch his missile inside
20 degrees angle-off in order to secure a kill. Certainly this poses no great problem,
as the
23

attacker will be forced in-trail since the fighter/target ratio is much less
than 2 to 1. However, despite this aid from a low fighter/target ratio, the
overhead attack is the poorest possible for employment of AIM-9B. (This
will become especially apparent when we discuss fighter-versus-fighter
tactics.)
High-Side Attack
In a High-side Attack, IR tone contrast will not be adequate at
longer missile ranges because of background reflections: however, when
compared to an overhead attack, IR range is somewhat better. G presents
no significant limitation, as illustrated by figure 12.
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Vt = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Gt = 2 Gr = 1.73
Gt = 1.6 Gr = 1.25
Vf × Vt × Sin θ 23, 700 × Sin θ
S=
=
32.2Gr
Gr
S = 13,700 Sinθ
Gr = 1.73

10° = 2380
20° = 4680
30° = 6840

S = 19,000 Sinθ
Gr = 1.25

10° = 3300
20° = 6490
30° = 9480
Figure 12

This figure discloses that when below 40,000 feet and pulling 2G, we
will be generating 1.73 radial G. Applying this figure to our cone of
max performance (our angular velocity cone) we find that at 30° angleoff, we can close to a range of 6,840 feet and at 10° angle-off, 2,380 feet,
but the important thing to remember is that we cannot get inside the
ranges specified at 30°, 20° and 10° angle-off without exceeding the 2-G
limitation. At 40,000 feet, when we are pulling 1.6 total G, we will be
generating 1.25 radial G. In terms of distance, we will be at the range
specified in the figure above. Once again, if we attempt to get inside the
specified range at a given angle-off, we will exceed our 1.6-G limitation.
We can see, by comparing the high-side attack with the overhead
attack, that the high-side is better, because of less limitations in IR and
G. In other words, we have greater freedom of maneuver to successfully
launch Sidewinder.
24

Six-O’clock Attack
In a six-o’clock attack, IR tone contrast occurs at greater ranges
because the horizon does not reflect as much background IR radiation.
Since we are at 0° angle-off, there will be no G or lambda limitation,
therefore we can fire Sidewinder from any range between maximum and
minimum. In view of these facts, the six-o’clock attack is the best so far,
because AIM-9B is not forced to operate near its limiting parameters. In
addition because of our position in relation to the target, we achieve an
element of surprise.
Underside Attack
The underside or six-o’clock-low attack, is the best possible attack we
can execute, as we acquire advantages in:
1. IR
2. G
3. Surprise
4. Aircraft Performance
IR Tone contrast is maximum against a blue-sky background. Here, the
lead sulphide cell can discriminate between he hot metal of the jet’s tailpipe
and the blue sky. At ranges of 20,000 feet and greater, the IR pattern
becomes longer than the range of the missile. The G limitation, in relation
to missile range and IR tone contrast, is almost non-existent (see figure 13).
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Vt = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Gt = 2
Gr @10° = 2 + .985 = 2.985
Gr @ 20° = 2 + .94 = 2.94
Gr @ 30° = 2 + .866 = 2.866
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 23, 700 × Sin θ
=
32.2Gr
Gr

For θ = 10°,
23, 700 × .174
S=
= 1, 380 '
2.985
For θ = 30°,
23, 700 × .5
S=
= 4,130 '
2.866
25

For θ = 20°,
23, 700 × .342
S=
= 2, 760 '
2.94

This figure shows that, as we approach our cone of maximum
performance, we find that we can generate 2.866 radial G while pulling
2 total G. Applying this value to the figure above, we find that we can
launch Sidewinder at a range as near as 4,130 feet at 30° angle-off without
exceeding our 2-G limitation. At 20° angle-off while generating 2.94 radial
G, we find that we can launch as near as 2,760 feet without exceeding the
2-total-G limitation. At 10° angle-off, we can launch at a range as close
as 1,380 feet. To put it another way, when we launch our missile against a
target from an underside attack, the missile must turn in the direction of
gravity to set up its collision course – thus, gravity, acting in the direction
of the missile’s turn, actually causes the missile to fall toward the target. In
other words, the missile has a maneuvering advantage, since it generates a
radial G greater than its total G. This advantage we have already considered
in the previous illustration. Surprise, the third major advantage, is greatest
when attacking a target from underneath, or from six-o’clock-low, since
this is the target’s blind area. Aircraft Performance, the forth major
advantage, can be understood by referring to figure 14.

UNDERSIDE ATTACK
Figure 14

26

Here, we are an attacker ready to launch AIM-9B against a target traveling
.9 Mach at 40,000 feet. Applying a rule-of-thumb for co-airspeed, we see
that the fighter can launch from a max range of about 13,000’. Now, if the
attacker sets himself up to launch from 30° angle-off, this means that he
can launch from a position 6,500 feet below the target. To achieve this
launch position, an attacker may start his attack at even a lower altitude –
the distance below dependent upon his airspeed. For example: An F-100 at
1.1 Mach may start his attack with an altitude differential of at least 10,000
feet – in this case, at 30,000 feet altitude. From this illustration, we can see
that AIM-9B gives an attacker an additional performance capability, in that
the attacker is not required to attain the target’s altitude.
In summary, since the underside attack provides the greatest
advantages – IR, G, surprise and performance – we should employ this
attack whenever possible. As you will see later, this holds true for both
fighter-versus-bomber and fighter-versus-fighter. When compared with a
gun attack, AIM-9B is far superior, since the range of the missile allows us
to get into an effective cone of fire.
BEST TYPE OF ATTACK AGAINST A NON-MANEUVERING TARGET
WITH THE 20MM CANNON
As you will recall, because of the characteristics of the pursuit curve,
our fire control system limitations, and the capabilities of our opponent’s
defensive fire, we consider the pursuit curve a poor attack at best, when
using the 20mm cannon. If does not matter whether we are in an overhead,
a high-side or an underside attack. The problem now is, how are we going
to attack a non-maneuvering target if we do not choose to use the pursuit
curve as illustrated previously. The solution we propose: Plan an attack in
which we combine the characteristics of the pursuit curve and the collision
course. To explain: On a collision course attack, the target will be allowed
to fly right through our bullet stream. The bullet stream itself will have
no angular velocity as generated in a pursuit curve type attack. A 100foot target with a speed of 800 feet per second, at 30,000 feet will require
approximately 1 ∕ 8 of a second to fly through our bullet stream. Assuming
that we can fire 6,000 round per minute – the combined rate of fire of 4
M-39 cannon – this means we fire at a rate of approximately 100 round per
second. If the target requires 1 ∕ 8 of a second to pass through our bullet
stream, we can expect about 12 hits it we set up a perfect attack. This is not
acceptable. In a pursuit curve attack, we do not have this problem, because
the angular velocity of our bullet stream matches the angular velocity of
our target. In other words, our bullet stream is constantly superimposed
against the target which is being tracked. The only disadvantage of this
attack is that it forces us into our opponent’s defensive cone of fire. To
counter the disadvantages of the pursuit curve and the collision course, we
assume attack conditions against an imaginary target and

27

apply them against a real target. To illustrate: We set up an attack so that
the angular velocity of our bullet stream matches that of a target going
slower than .8 Mach – say .5 Mach. This allows us to fire at a higher angleoff, at a given range, because of the slower target. Then we apply this
imaginary attack – against a .5-Mach target – to the .8-Mach target. To do
this, we place our reticle in front of the .8-mach target, generating the G
necessary to track a .5-Mach target which means our real target (.8) closes
upon our bullet stream (.5) with a delta Mach of .3 which, at 30,000 feet,
is 300 feet per second. Firing 100 rounds per second, this allows us to put
approximately 33 holes in the target with a perfect pass, as compared to 12
in a collision course.
Our only requirement is to figure the amount of lead necessary, when
firing. To determine lead, we need to know three components;
1. Lead for target motion
2. Lead for gravity drop.
3. Trajectory shift.
If we use a fixed sight, we will have to determine all three
components. If we use radar, or keep the sight pegged at the range from
which we plan to fire, gravity drop and trajectory shift will be completely
computed and lead for target motion partially computed. We’ll use pegged
sight, to simplify our lead problem. Radar is not applicable because the
overhead needed to set up the attack takes us out of our radar tracking
cone. To determine the additional lead we need to enable our pegged sight
to indicate the bullet impact area, we use the following formula:
Lead =

Vt × Sin θ × 1000
Vp

Where
Vt = rate of closure of the target, in feet per second toward the bullet stream
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off
Vp = average projectile velocity (dynamic gravity drop tables)
Lead = additional lead in mils
The lead in mils which we acquire from the above formula is placed in the
sight reticle, so that the outer diamond indicates the bullet impact area as
the target passes through the reticle. To compute the lead for insertion into
out sight reticle we use the following formula:

28

WS
2 × lead in mils
=
Firing Range
1000
In order to solve for both additional lead and reticle size, we need to know
the firing range and the angle-off at which we’ll be firing. Assume that we
attack a target which is traveling .8 Mach (at 35,000 feet) at .9 Mach with 3
Gr.
Step I
To find the firing range and angle-off, we assume a .5-Mach target and
solve in the following manner:
At 35,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach
VT = .5 Mach
N=3
θ = 30°, 25°, 20°
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 873 × 485 × Sin θ
=
= 4380(Sin θ )
32.2 N
96.6

At 30°
S = 4380 (.5) = 2190’
At 25°
S = 4380 (.423) = 1850’
At 20°
S = 4380 (.342) = 1500’
Step II
To find the additional lead (in mils) needed against a .8 Mach target
we solve in the following manner:
l=

Vt × (Sin θ ) × 1000
Vp

At 30°
291'× (.5) × 1000
l=
= 38 mils
3840
At 25°
l=

291'× (.423) × 1000
= 32 mils
3880
29

At 20°
291 × (.342) × 1000
l=
= 25.5 mils
3920
Step III
To determine the additional lead to be incorporated into the sight
reticle we solve in the following manner:
At 30° angle-off
WS
2 × lead in mils
=
Firing Range
1000
WS
76
=
2190 1000
WS = 166
At 25° angle-off
WS
64
=
1850 1000
WS = 118
At 20° angle-off
WS
51
=
1500 1000
WS = 76
From Step III we can see that it will be impossible to set up the additional
lead by placing the wingspan lever on 166 since 120 is the maximum
setting. This means that we can either fire at 1850’, 25° angle-off (steps I
and II with the wingspan lever at 118) or at 1500’, 20° angle-off with the
wingspan lever at 76. Since we want to fire at max angle-off, we’ll set the
wingspan lever at 118 and fire at 1850’, 25° angle-off.
Now to perform the attack. We do not use the conventional pursuit
curve approach, as this does not allow us to determine target speed and
direction, and we need these factors to apply the attack we have just
computed. To apply this attack correctly, we use a barrel-roll type of attack.
To set it up, we fly in the same direction as the target and about 3,000 to
4,000 feet above it. From there we turn about 10° from his line of flight,
barrel-roll — in the direction of

30

the turn - down to a key point, trying to maintain an almost constant
angular relationship between us and the target. See figure 15. From here,
we place the sight reticle well out in front of the target, in line with his
flight path, and pull the G necessary to track the imaginary target. As we
close to our firing range and angle-off, the target will move toward our
sight reticle. As the target starts to cross the outer diamond, we depress the
gun trigger and hold it down until the tail of the target passes through the
outer diamond. From there we recover and set up another attack by kicking
in afterburner and rolling back to the same position on top of the target.
This attack has definite advantages: It allows the attacker to fire at a
higher angle-off than in a pure pursuit curve attack. It allows the attacker
to fly through the target’s defensive cone of fire at a faster rate than is
possible in a normal pursuit curve attack. Since he is flying a combination
of a pursuit curve and a collision course, another and probably the most
important advantage is that the attacker finds it easy to reposition himself
for consecutive attacks. This is possible because the attacker is alway close
enough to the target to judge relative positioning. The big disadvantage of
the barrel-roll attack – as we employ it – is that it provides the attacker less
time for lethal fire. However, in view of the fact that a fighter can perform
more consecutive attacks than in a normal pursuit curve, this disadvantage
does not appear to be too restrictive.
In summary, we do not advocate the barrel-roll attack as a cure-all
for fire control problems encountered when firing against bomber-type
aircraft. Instead, we consider it somewhat of a “Rube Goldberg” affair
designed to surmount the problems associated with today’s normal
pursuit curve attack, when using guns as the means for ordnance delivery.
Although it appears difficult to perform, pilots are able, with just a
minimum of practice, to set themselves up quite successfully.
MANEUVERING FOR THE ATTACK
Success, in air-to-air combat, depends on the ability of a pilot to place
himself in a position from which he can deliver his fire power. In fighterversus-bomber combat, time is important also and can be considered a
measurement of success. To illustrate: If we have a bomber attempting
to destroy a given target, we must not only position ourselves to deliver
our fire power, but must also expedite our positioning before the bomber
reaches “bombs away” points. Since timing is so critical, we must use the
very best method by which we can position ourselves for this attack. As
we have shown, the best weapon in terms of performance and ease of
delivery, is AIM-9B. The best attack with this weapon and our aircraft, is
the underside attack. Positioning for this attack depends upon the space
relationship between you and the target. Considering this relationship, GCI
may provide a set-up from three possible positions.

31

Figure 15
32
ROLL-SLIDE ATTACK

1. Nose-quarter
2. Abeam, or 90°
3. Tail-quarter
Assuming VFR conditions, it will be the responsibility of each attacker –
upon visually acquiring the target – to maneuver from any one of these
set-ups to the firing envelope behind the target. To get into this position
quickly, an attacker must maneuver in a three-dimensional field to acquire
the maximum benefits from airspeed and turn. If the attacker does not
understand three-dimensional maneuvering, he will be little more effective
than GCI in maneuvering from a setup or approach, to a final firing
position (GCI will place him in the firing envelope through the use of twodimensional maneuvers).
The Nose-Quarter Attack: In performing the nose-quarter attack, we
do not choose to approach our target from a direct head-on position. If we
do, we will be forced to perform a 180° change of direction by executing
a level or a climbing turn (high-speed yo-yo) to approach our target from
a six-o’clock position. The time consumed in a level turn allows the target
to generate a great amount of longitudinal separation. This allows the
target aircraft to make considerable penetration of a defense area before
the attacker can set up a missile attack. The climbing turn or high-speed
yo-yo allows the attacker to complete his change of direction in less time;
however, at the end of this maneuver, the attacker will find himself with
considerable longitudinal separation in relation to the target, since his
airspeed has decayed considerably below that of the target. Once again,
the target aircraft will effect considerable penetration before the attacker
can position himself to launch AIM-9B. If the attacker is directed by GCI
for a nose-quarter attack, he should request GCI to set him up on an
anti-parallel course to an offset point 15,000 feet to one side of the target’s
line of flight. When the attacker visually acquires the target, or when GCI
indicates that he is ten miles from the target, the attacker should apply full
afterburner power. At the same time, he should dive to an altitude about
5,000 feet below the target, so he will be offset in both the vertical and
horizontal planes. This provides the attacker with maneuvering airspeed
and a position from which to execute a chandelle followed by a low-speed
yo-yo (a dive behind and below the target) to the attack cone behind the
target. See figure 16. Compared to a level turn, this maneuver allows the
attacker to complete his 180° change of direction more rapidly. In addition,
since the attacker is turning through both the vertical and horizontal
planes, his horizontal turning component is reduced. As a result of these
two factors – fast turn rate and small turn radius – the attacker will be in
a position much nearer the target’s attack cone. To prevent the target from
penetrating the defense area excessively, the attacker must dive behind and
below the target at the completion of 90°

33

Figure 16

34
NOSE-QUARTER ATTACK

of turn. This will aid the attacker in recouping the speed lost in the
chandelle. Also, it allows him to turn inside the target’s line of flight,
because he is able to reduce his horizontal turning component by
maneuvering through both the vertical and horizontal planes. Result:
The attacker quickly positions himself – at six-o’clock-low – to launch
Sidewinder.
The Beam or 90° Approach: In a beam approach, our problem
remains essentially the same as that in a nose-quarter attack. That is, we
must quickly place the attacker in a launch position, to reduce penetration
time. The best means by which to accomplish this, upon visually acquiring
the target, is to use afterburner and perform a diving turn, below and
behind the target’s line of flight. Once again, afterburner, coupled with a
descending turn, will increase rate of closure, because of rapid acceleration.
At the same time, since the turn is through both the vertical and horizontal
planes, a cutoff is easily effected. Result: the attacker is quickly set up for
a missile attack from six-o’clock-low. If the beam attack starts from a high
position, the same procedures should still be used. Remember, the attacker
wants to reduce the target’s penetration time. At the same time, he wants
to set up for the best possible attack. A diving turn or low-speed yo-yo will
satisfy both of these conditions. If a beam attack is initiated from a low
position, the previous procedures still apply, since the attacker is trying
to reduce target penetration time by rapid closure and a cutoff inside the
target’s line of flight.
In a tail-quarter attack, the problem of defense area penetration is
most critical. To reduce this penetration time and to allow the attacker to
position himself for the best possible missile attack, he must accomplish a
dive below and inside his opponent’s line of flight, up to an attack position
(inside yo-yo). Since penetration time is so critical, the procedure will
remain the same whether the attack starts from a high or low position.
FLIGHT TACTICS
Tactical formation, hence flight tactics, are designed primarily to
provide maximum mutual support and visual cross cover and retain
maximum maneuverability for any air-to-air operation. In other words,
tactical formations must provide both defensive and offensive capabilities.
To provide these capabilities, a compromise between maximum mutual
support and maximum maneuverability must be accomplished. The
extent of the compromise will depend upon the type of mission flown.
Though our mission – fighter-versus-bomber – emanates from a defensive
situation, it is offensive in nature, in that the fighter is trying to destroy the
bomber aircraft and is not primarily interested in providing security for
himself.
The present concept of weapons employment (nuclear weapons)
indicates that a given enemy will employ saturation-type tactics rather than
a concentration of his force over a given target area. In other
35

words, we may expect an attack force composed of single bombers
dispersed over a wide area to strike at many targets. To counter this at all
points, with four-ship scrambles, is not the answer, for we need a defense
force numbering four times that of the strike force. We will be providing
unnecessary security for the attacking fighters, as well as violating the
dictum, “economy of force!” The problem remains – how shall we tactically
deploy our fighters? A single fighter against a single bomber may appear
the obvious answer, however, this is not so. When employing single fighters
against a saturation-type raid, we would be assuming that each fighter
would intercept its respective target without exception. There would be no
ground aborts, air aborts, and/or possible fire control malfunctions. Result:
some attacking bombers would get through our defenses. To preclude this
possibility, we recommend a two-ship flight, as the basic unit, in a given
fighter-versus-bomber intercept. The two-ship flight will be composed of a
leader and his wingman.
In patrol position – prior to visually acquiring the bomber –
the wingman should fly approximately 10 to 20 degrees back and
approximately 1500 feet out. If he flies in much closer, too much time
will be spent in flying formation and not enough in covering the leader
and aiding him in visually acquiring the target. Flying too far out reduces
maneuverability and may cause the wingman to become separated from
his leader. When maneuvering, the wingman will play the outside as well
as the inside of the turn, in a means of maintaining position. To do this
effectively, he must maneuver through both the horizontal and vertical
planes. This will allow him to reduce his horizontal turning component
and thus maintain his relative position more easily. Procedure: When on
the outside of a turn, the wingman should lower his nose and cross to the
inside. If on the inside of the turn, and sliding forward, he would cross to
the outside, slide high and fly in the plane of the leader. In other words, a
wingman will fly a partial extended-low position, on the inside of the turn,
and an extended high position – in the plane of the leader’s wing – on the
outside of the turn. One thing for the wingman to remember: He must
not cross in front of the leader. Instead, he should always maintain nosetail separation, thus precluding the possibility of getting in the way of his
leader.
To reduce the bomber’s defense-area penetration, the flight must
quickly maneuver from the approach to the best attack position. To do
this, the flight must maneuver at max performance through both the
vertical and horizontal planes. Under these circumstances, it would be
quite difficult for the wingman to maintain the patrol position defined
above. To enable the wingman to maintain a relative position during
these maneuvers, we place him in a new position – the fighting position.
Fighting Position: The wingman will fly within a 60° cone behind the
leader at a distance of about 1000 feet. See figure 17. While flying in the
cone, the wingman will maneuver through both the horizontal and

36

Figure 17

37
FIGHTING POSITION

vertical planes to maintain position. He will slide high when overshooting,
and drop low to the inside when falling back. In other words, the
maneuvering technique is basically the same as that of the patrol position.
If the leader is unable to deliver a successful attack against a bomber
aircraft, the wingman will take over the lead position and initiate the
attack. If neither the wingman nor the leader can deliver a successful
missile attack, they will press in – with afterburner – and zoom above the
target aircraft. From this position, they can execute coordinated barrel-roll
attacks against the bomber aircraft. When the leader comes out of his roll,
and into the firing position, the wingman may start down. When the leader
slides to a new high position on the target, the wingman will be in the
firing cone, and the cycle just repeats itself.
If the bomber is too high to permit successful employment of the
barrel-roll attack, the fighters have no recourse. They will be forced to
approach the target from below and from the six-o’clock position. If this
tactic must be employed, it behooves the fighters to fire at the extreme
range of the fire control system. Since the bomber is much larger, as
compared to the fighter, their opportunity to secure a lethal burst is
certainly as good if not better – than that of the defending bomber. The
important thing to remember: the bomber must be destroyed, regardless of
the tactics used, or the weapon employed.
SUMMARY
In our discussion of Aerial Attack, we stated that tactics were
developed according to the performance capabilities or limitations of the
weapons system used – our weapons as well as the opponent’s. Recognizing
this we set about to determine the performance parameters of our weapons
systems – the F-100 equipped with AIM-9B and the 20 mm cannon. Study
revealed: To successfully employ AIM-9B, it must be launch within a given
firing envelope. The firing envelope is determined by the radiation pattern
of the target and the performance envelope of the missile. The parameters
of this envelope are determined by, (1) the size of the target’s infra-red
pattern, )2) the range of the missile, (3) G-capability of the missile, and, (4)
AIM-9B lambda limitation. To successfully employ the 20 mm cannon, the
pilot must be within the theoretical capability of the fire control system,
and have control responses precise enough to control this equipment.
We then applied the information provided by this study – the
limitations of AIM-9B and the 20mm cannon, to the pursuit curve, to find
the best attack envelope for each system. We found that the best attack
envelope for AIM-9B is an underside or a six-o’clock-low attack. For 20mm
cannon, we found that the best attack would have to be a

38

barrel-roll attack, combining the characteristics of the pursuit curve and
the collision course. Comparing this information revealed that AIM-9B
is a far superior weapon for a fighter-versus-bomber intercept, since its
firing envelope and resultant attack cone is much greater than is possible
when employing the 20mm cannon. Sidewinder’s main disadvantage, in
a fighter-versus-bomber intercept, is its inability to discriminate target IR
radiation from background IR clutter. This disadvantage can easily result
in the attacker being forced to use the 20mm cannon attack. NOTE: Keep
in mind that the advantage which AIM-9B enjoys over ordinary armament,
in a fighter-versus-bomber attack, is not near as great in a fighter-versusfighter situation. (We will elaborate on this in Part II of this manual.)
Since AIM-9B provides a larger attack cone and a greater capability,
tactics will be predicated upon this advantage. Whether an attacker
approaches the target from the nose-quarter, beam or tail-quarter position,
he will set up to deliver AIM-9B. If conditions preclude missile delivery, he
will press in and employ 20 mm cannon. Before the attacker reaches this
weapon delivery point, he must maneuver through both the vertical and
horizontal planes as it is his responsibility to provide positive guarantee
that individual bombers in a saturation-type strike will be intercepted.
Two-ship scrambles will be employed. If more than two aircraft are used,
the fighter defense is spread too thin. Simply stated, the dictum, “economy
of force” would be violated with little gain in effective combat potential.

39

40

INTRODUCTION
In our discussion of fighter-versus-bomber tactics, you will recall, we
determined the capabilities and limitations of our weapons systems. On
having learned these parameters, we then developed our fighter-versusbomber tactical doctrine. In our discussion of fighter-versus-fighter tactics,
we will employ this same procedure. The order of discussion will be as
follows:
1. Basic limitations of AIM-9B Against a Maneuvering Target
2. Fighter Maneuvers
3. Tactical Formation
4. Flight Tactics
When analyzing fighter-versus-fighter tactics, by way of the four major
phases above, we will employ the case system – a plan whereby we examine
possible hypothetical situations which the pilot may encounter in fighterversus-fighter combat.

41

CHAPTER I
BASIC LIMITATIONS OF AIM-9B AGAINST A MANEUVERING
TARGET
In discussing the employment of AIM-9B against a non-maneuvering
target, we indicated that the missile has four basic limitations – IR,
range, G, and lambda – and that these limitations forced us to deliver the
missile in a cone 60° wide, emanating from the tail of the target aircraft.
It was also shown that the length of this cone would vary according to
altitude and delta Mach. At high altitude, with a positive delta Mach, the
cone (envelope) will be considerably longer than at low altitude. In our
discussion of fighter-versus-bomber tactics, we defined this cone in terms
of angular velocity (max performance cone). By angular velocity cone,
we mean an envelope in which the attacking fighter may deliver AIM-9B
without exceeding its maneuvering limitations. We can see, by applying
this angular velocity cone to any fighter-versus-bomber or fighter-versusfighter situation, that the purpose of any tactics which we develop will be
to place us in this cone. On the other hand, when in a defensive situation,
we will attempt to rotate this cone away from a given opponent. By doing
this, we prevent him from securing a firing position.
When employing AIM-9B against a maneuvering target, the cone
not only diminishes in size, it also changes in shape. In other words,
the geometric shape of the maneuvering envelope will be considerably
different than a non-maneuvering envelope. To illustrate: When discussing
the non-maneuvering envelope, we found that its basic shape was
determine by four factors – IR, range, G and lambda. We noted that these
envelopes were rather symmetrical in shape. Maneuvering envelopes, on
the other hand, are not so symmetrical. The lambda and G-limitations
are primarily responsible for this change in shape. The reason for this:
Lambda limitation may be exceeded because of a combination of low
missile velocity and high angle off. If we launch AIM-9B from long range
– within the effective range of the missile – at a maneuvering target, we
can expect the target to turn into the attack. His objective is, of course to
rotate his angular velocity cone away from the launch aircraft. By doing
this, the defender can force the missile to exceed its lambda limit, because
the missile is not only slowing down as it approaches the target, but the
angle-off is increasing, since the defender is turning into the missile’s line
of flight. In other words, the angular velocity generated by the defender
forces AIM-9B to turn farther and farther in front of the target to maintain
its collision course. This, of course, increases the resultant lambda angle.
In addition, the missile is forced to turn even farther in front of the target,
because of its continuous decrease in velocity after rocket motor burn-out,
producing an extremely large lambda angle. If AIM-9B is launched near its
max-effective range and the target turns into the attack, the combination of
increasing angle-off and missile deceleration can easily cause the missile to
exceed its lambda limitation. If
42

this occurs, the gyro seeker rubs against its mechanical stops, which stops
the gyro and the missile loses guidance.
The attacker can do two things to avoid exceeding lambda limitation:
(1) reduce his range before launch, which results in a higher missile
velocity in relation to the target, and therefore, a smaller resultant lambda
angle, and (2) reduce angle off. The smaller the angle off, the lower the
resulting lambda angle. It is now obvious that the best attack can be
initiated from the six-o’clock position at a reduced range. It is also obvious
that lambda is the greatest missile limitation against a maneuvering target.
To illustrate the magnitude of this limitation, let’s examine figure 18 and
19.

Figure 18

43

Figure 19

When AIM-9B is launch from a .8 Mach attacker against a .8 Mach
maneuvering target which is performing a 3-G turn into the attack, we
note (from figure 18) that effective missile range is somewhat less than that
available against a non-maneuvering target. We also note that max angle
off from which Aim-9B may be launched is less than 20°. The reduction in
range is necessary because of the 25° lambda limit, while the reduced angle
off is caused by a combination of lambda and G-limitations (G-limitations
will be discussed later). If the target pulls more than 3 G, the maneuvering
envelope will become even smaller.

44

At 6G, there will be no point from which the attacker can fire the missile
and achieve a kill. In other words, there will be no maneuvering envelope
at all. If AIM-9B is launched from a Mach-1 attacker against a Mach-1
target, at 35,000 feet, we note the following: When the target performs a
3-G turn into the attack, at missile launch, the attacker must reduce his
range by approximately one-third when firing from a six-o’clock position
(see figure 19). If the attacker launches at 30° angle-off, he must reduce
his range by approximately one-half – as compared to a non-maneuvering
target – if he expect to get a kill. Once again, the reason for this reduction
in range is lambda limitation. The attacker must reduce his range, by
a greater magnitude, at 30° angle-off because missile lambda angle is
increase by both high angle-off and increased range. When the angle off
is increased, range must be reduced to preclude exceeding lambda limit,
hence the difference in range reduction between a zero-degree angle off
and a high-angle-off shot against a maneuvering target. Once again, if the
target increases G, the maneuvering envelope diminishes in size. At 6-G,
there will be no maneuvering envelope, therefore, the attacker cannot
achieve a successful launch and kill against a target pulling 6-G.
In our discussion of the above envelopes, we assume that there has
been no diminution of target speed in any of his maneuvers. If speed decay
occurs, the attack conditions will change and the attack will no longer
be co-speed. As a result, missile velocity will be higher in relation to the
target, and the resultant lambda angle will be smaller, since velocity varies
inversely with lambda angle (at a given range and angle-off). This means
that if the attacker has a positive delta Mach, rather than a co-speed
relationship, he can launch at a greater range without exceeding lambda
limitation. On the other hand, if the attacker is forced to launch against
a maneuvering target which is traveling faster than the attacker, missile
velocity, in relation to the target, is smaller. Result: The attacker must
launch at a shorter range to preclude lambda limitation.
In view of the above relationships, we can see that the best attack is
one in which the attacker has a positive delta Mach and a low angle-off
on his initial approach to the target. This will provide greater freedom of
maneuver and the opportunity to launch at longer ranges. On the other
hand, the worst possible attack is one in which the attacker has a negative
delta Mach and a high angle-off. This will restrict his freedom of maneuver
and force him into a position from which the target can easily defend
against this attack.
If AIM-9B is launched from an attack executed in the vertical plane
overhead or underside attack – the maneuvering target will be forced to
turn into the attack. Once again, by turning into the plane of the attack, the
target will generate max angular velocity and force the missile to operate
near its limiting parameters. In an overhead attack, this means that the
attacker will not only be concerned with

45

lambda limitation, but also with the same limitations encountered in an
attack against a non-maneuvering target – IR and G. These limitations
force the attacker to diminish his range until he can discriminate between
IR background clutter and target signal and/or avoid exceeding the
lambda limitation. This means that in a .9 Mach co-speed attack against a
maneuvering target, the attacker will be forced to fire at less than 20° angleoff, otherwise, he will exceed his 2G limitation (see figure 20). Remember,
in an overhead attack, the difference between total and radial G is
considerably less than in the high-side or the underside attack (Gt = Gr +
Cosθ), therefore, to stay within the 2G limitation, the attacker must launch
from longer ranges (at a given angle-off). For example, if an attacker
performs an overhead .9-Mach co-speed attack – to prevent himself from
exceeding the 2G launch limitation at 30° angle-off – he must launch from
a range of at least 10,450 feet. Under the same conditions, he can launch
from a range of 6,840 feet at 30° angle-off in a high-side or level attack. In
an underside attack, he can launch as near as 4,130 feet at 30° angle-off and
still be within the 2G launch limitation.
From the above analysis, it is apparent that the overhead attack is the
worst possible because of the limitations imposed by IR, G and lambda.
Unlike an overhead attack against a non-maneuvering target, the attacker
will find it difficult to acquire the low angle-off necessary for launch.
Instead, since the target is turning into the attack, the angle-off will
increase and the opportunity to launch will be lost. On the other hand,
there is a slight advantage since the target is forced to turn into the attack –
he will be forced to pull up and will consequently experience speed decay.
The attacker will have a positive delta Mach and a higher missile velocity
in relation to the target, and, therefore, a greater range from which he can
launch AIM-9B before lambda limit is reached. This advantage is not a
real advantage however, because the attacker can still be forced to exceed
the IR and G parameters. We know, from our study of AIM-9B, that if we
force the missile to exceed any one of the four parameters – IR, range, G
or lambda – a kill will be unlikely. From a tactics standpoint, while on the
defensive, the attack most easy to defend against is an overhead attack with
a negative delta Mach. In this situation, we force the attacker to exceed a
greater number of his limiting parameters than in any other attack.
The underside, or six-o’clock-low attack is the best possible attack
which we can execute against a maneuvering target. It was noted in our
analysis of this attack against a non-maneuvering target that we acquired
advantage in IR, G, surprise, and performance. When attacking a
maneuvering target, we retain these advantages, but acquire a disadvantage
from lambda limitation. The lambda disadvantage is however, overridden
by the advantages. This is true because the advantages of IR and G allow
the attacker to launch at relatively shorter ranges at high angles-off,
without exceeding the 2G launch

46

Figure 20

47

limitation. (Remember, in an underside attack, radial G is greater than
total G.) In other words, the attacker receives the benefit of 1G gravity, thus
allowing him to position himself closer to the target at a higher angle-off
without exceeding his 2G limitation (total G). This means that the attacker
can reduce his range to stay within the lambda limitation and still be
within his 2G launch limitation. In effect, the attacker is provided greater
freedom of maneuver to successfully launch AIM-9B. In an underside
attack, this freedom of maneuver is greater than in any other attack.
From the defender’s viewpoint, it is certainly the most difficult attack to
defend against. In summary we may say: The best attack for AIM-9B is the
underside attack and the worst attack is the overhead attack – especially if
the attacker has a negative delta Mach.

48

CHAPTER II
FIGHTER MANEUVERS
To acquire an understanding of the science of fighter-versus-fighter
combat, a complete knowledge of the spatial relationships involved
in this form of aerial combat, is necessary. Before he can achieve this
understanding, any tactician must be able to define or imagine a frame
of reference, within which he must operate. In addition, he must know
the basic tools which he may employ in this frame of reference. Simply
stated, this means that the pilot must understand the geometric space
relationships and how to apply this insight to a given fighter-versus-fighter
situation. Our purpose, in fighter maneuvers, will be two-fold: (1) To
define and present geometric relationships needed for fighter-versusfighter combat, and (2) to show how to properly apply these relationships
in fighter maneuvers.
In discussing fighter-versus-fighter combat, it is evident that many
pilots believe there are an infinite number of situations and solutions
in a given tactical encounter. Such is not the case! The field in which
a fighter pilot must operate is three-dimensional and finite. The size
and shape of the field is determined by the pull of 1G gravity and the
performance limitations of the aircraft and its pilot. We can imagine this
field to be spherical in shape, with a flattened northern hemisphere and
an elongated southern hemisphere. See figure 21. The spherical shape
is generated by a maneuvering fighter’s turn and velocity operating
through three dimensions. The elongation results from the effect of 1G
gravity on the fighter in this three-dimensional field of maneuver. Turn,
speed and the force of gravity determine the operating envelopes and we
need only understand spatial relationships presented by these factors to
develop effective fighter maneuvers. To know how to secure an advantage
over an opponent, an attacker need only visualize turn, velocity and G
projected onto this spheroid shape. He has no control over the force of
gravity, of course, but he can exercise complete control over aircraft turn
and velocity. As a result, he can maneuver in a manner to effectively use
the pull of gravity in a given tactical situation. Thus in a fighter-versusfighter situation, the pilot can do two things to gain an advantage over an
opponent: Change turn and/or velocity, in respect to his opponent. He
can accomplish either or both by maneuvering through both the vertical
and horizontal planes by employing either a two-dimensional maneuver
through three-dimensional space, or a three-dimensional maneuver (barrel
roll).

49

FIELD OF MANEUVER
Figure 21

50

To apply these principles correctly, we need only recall what we
determined previously in regard to weapons capability. We determined
that to successfully employ AIM-9B or the 20mm cannon, we must attain
a launch or firing position in the angular velocity cone emanating from
the tail of our opponent. Applying the three-dimensional concept of turn
and velocity, this means that we must reduce one or both of these factors in
order to secure an advantage. Employing these spatial relationships against
a given opponent will provide insight as to the type of maneuver which we
must employ to defeat him.
In our discussion of fighter maneuvers, we will keep in mind this
concept of turn and velocity within a three-dimensional field. As stated
earlier, we will use the case system to determine not only what maneuver
to employ, but also how to employ it to acquire maximum benefit. In
discussing fighter-versus-fighter tactics, our first maneuver for discussion
will be the defensive turn. We choose to start with this maneuver because
it is the basic maneuver by which the defender tries to nullify an attacker’s
advantage. This may cause our approach to appear to be defensive in
nature, however, we feel that this is necessary since any offensive action is
directly dependent on the precise maneuver which the defendant chooses
to execute. If the defender’s knowledge is limited in scope, the attacker’s
corresponding maneuvers will reflect this limitation.
Defensive Turn
The purpose of the defensive turn is to prevent an opponent from
achieving a launch or firing position. As stated earlier, the objective of this
maneuver is to rotate our angular velocity cone away from the attacker. The
best way to achieve this is to turn into the plane of the attack. This means
that in an overhead attack, we will pull up into the attack; in an underside
attack, we will dive into the attack; and if the attack is from six-o’clock, we
will turn in whichever direction provides the greatest tactical advantage.
Assuming that an attacker armed with an IR missile is approaching our
angular velocity cone from six-o’clock, how would we defend against
this attack? First, perform a hard turn with a slight dive. This turn
should not be a break or maximum performance maneuver. If so, we will
experience high speed-decay and loss of maneuvering potential, eventually
diminishing our angular velocity. As a result we will probably successfully
defend against the missile attack, but our attacker will be in position for
a follow-up gun attack. If we employ the hard turn and the slight dive,
we generate enough angular velocity to preclude a missile launch at long
range, and at the same time we retain future maneuvering potential. As
range diminishes, the attacker will be looking for an opportunity to launch
a missile; however, since he is in a pursuit curve attack, his rate of turn
is a function of target speed, angle-off and range. At long range the rate
of turn required for the attacker to track is considerably less than ours.
Consequently, the attacker’s
51

angle-off and rate of closure will increase. The increase in angle-off
demands a further reduction in range before the attacker can successfully
launch without exceeding the lambda limitation. This forces the attacker to
get closer and, since he is on a curve of pursuit, his angle-off is continuing
to increase as his range decreases. The rate of turn formula
W=

Vt × Sin θ
Range

indicates that rate of turn will increase if angle-off increases (Sinθ) and
range decreases on an attack against a maneuvering target. Both of these
conditions occur. This means that the attacker generates a rapid buildup in his rate of turn, and by the time he reaches the point at which he
can launch without exceeding lambda limit, he exceeds the 2G launch
limitation. With a .9-Mach co-speed attack at 35,000 feet, this will occur
at a range of about 7,000 feet from the target. If the attacker gets closer, he
must forego a missile attack and attempt to set up a 20mm cannon attack.
This is necessary because when attacking a maneuvering target, once the
G-limit is exceeded, G cannot be reduced – it will continue to build up as
range diminishes.
As a defender, we are now forced to nullify our opponent’s subsequent
gun attack. To accomplish this, let us once again analyze our relative
positions: The attacker, noting that he has lost the opportunity to deliver
a missile, will attempt to reduce his angle-off and slide into our six-o’clock
position. To prevent this, we must increase G and rotate our angular
velocity cone away from our opponent. Our concern now is to acquire a
smaller turn radius than the attacker. This will force him outside our turn
and prevent him from achieving a tracking solution. To accomplish this
objective, we must play the turn in respect to the attacker. The moment
we notice his attempt to diminish angle-off, we increase our G, to prevent
him from diminishing his angle-off and sliding toward our six-o’clock
position. If he continues to press the attack, tighten the turn to prevent him
from staying on the inside of the turn. In effect, we are trying to place him
on the other side of our angular velocity cone. If we play this maneuver
correctly, he will be unable to match our turn radius. The formula for turn
radius:
Vf 2
R=
32.2 N
Where
R = Turn radius in feet
Vf = Fighter velocity in feet/second
N = Number of radial G
Indicates that the fighter with the lower velocity and/or greater G has a
smaller turn radius. In this situation, the attacker’s speed and G are directly
dependent upon the defender’s action and if we pull a certain number of G,
the attacker cannot pull the same amount. If he does, his rate of turn will
equal ours, and, at the end of a
52

180° turn, the attacker becomes the defender and we the attacker. Of course
this will not occur, because the attacker will be forced to play his turn in
respect to our position. This means that his G will be less, and as a result,
his speed decay will not be as rapid as ours. As is shown by the above
formula, the attacker will have a greater turn radius for two reasons: (1)
higher speed, and (2) lower G. As a result if the attacker continues to press
the attack in the plane of our turn, he must overshoot. This provides the
attacker little opportunity to track the target and places him, geometrically,
on the other side of our flight path. Of course, this presupposes that we,
as the defender, are turning near or at maximum rate. If not, the attacker
would be able to slide toward 6-o’clock, pull a higher G, diminish airspeed
and avoid an overshoot. As we will see later, the lateral separation provided
by this overshoot is a “must” for the defender’s subsequent actions.
Procedures for the Defensive Turn
1. Estimate range and angle-off of the attacking aircraft.
2. Perform a hard turn if the attacker is near AIM-9B launch range.
This is a planned maneuver to preclude a successful missile launch.
3. Do not make an instantaneous max-performance turn. This will
kill off airspeed very rapidly and reduce future angular velocity as well as
maneuvering potential.
4. Play the turn to maintain the attacker at a high angle-off. This will
force him to diminish his range and exceed the 2-G launch limit, at about
the time when he is within lambda limit.
5. Increase rate of turn steadily to maximum performance as the
attacker approaches gun-firing range. This will prevent him from acquiring
a tracking solution and sliding toward your six-o’clock position.
Adverse Yaw
Adverse yaw is defined as the tendency of the aircraft to yaw or roll
away from the intended turn. In the F-100, this condition is present in
the sub-sonic speed range, and is especially noticeable in high-angle-ofattack maneuvering. If proper technique is not employed to counteract
adverse yaw in high-angle-of-attack maneuvers, aircraft maneuverability
is seriously compromised. In fighter-versus-fighter combat, since
maneuverability is a key to success, inability to handle adverse yaw will
produce disastrous results. We can see this upon examining the defensive
turn. In defending against an AIM-9B attack, the speed and G which we
were pulling produce a low angle of attack. Defending against a follow-up
gun attack, however, produced a high

53

angle of attack. If conventional technique is attempted when max
performance is necessary, the result will not be maximum performance.
To preclude performance degradation, the pilot must develop two entirely
different techniques to control the F-100 under low-angle-of-attack and
high-angle-of-attack conditions.
In low-angle-of-attack maneuvers, conventional technique will
be employed. That is, ailerons will be primary control for directional
change, in either turn or a roll, and rudder will be secondary. It will be
used to counter the small amount of adverse yaw to keep the turn or roll
coordinated. Back pressure will be employed to control the rate of turn or
the intensity of the roll.
In high-angle-of-attack maneuvers, the following techniques will be
employed: Rudder will be used to control directional change. Ailerons will
be moved to the neutral position and back pressure will be employed to
control the rate of turn or intensity of the roll. In a high-angle-of-attack
situation, if the pilot employs aileron as primary for directional change,
he will induce a roll-off in the direction away from the intended turn.
The more aileron he applies, the faster the roll-away. This is true because,
in a turn, the induced drag on the inboard wing is less than that on the
outboard wing. If aileron is employed, the inboard aileron is deflected
up and the outboard aileron is deflected down. This condition imposes
an additional increment of drag upon the outboard wing. As a result, the
aircraft yaws toward the high-drag area, or in a direction away from the
intended turn. In low-angle-of-attack maneuvers, this yaw can be corrected
by applying rudder until the ball is centered. In a high-angle-of-attack
maneuver with the F-100, this technique is not satisfactory. As the angle of
attack increases, the amount of adverse yaw generated by the induced drag
and deflected ailerons increases. The yaw increase causes the outboard
wing to meet the relative wind at a velocity less than the inboard wing.
The decrease in velocity, plus the downward deflection of the outboard
aileron, causes the aileron to stall out, consequently, there will be less lift
over the outboard wing. The aircraft will roll in the direction of the yaw.
If additional aileron is applied to correct this roll-off, the rate of roll will
increase and the adverse yaw and stall conditions will be magnified. If
rudder is employed – along with aileron – the adverse yaw generated may
be cancelled by the favorable yaw induce by the rudder. However, as the
angle of attack builds up, the adverse yaw generated by induced drag and
deflected aileron become greater than the favorable yaw generated by the
rudder. Thus, a roll-off will still occur, however, at a slightly higher angle
of attack. On the other hand, if we neutralize aileron and employ rudder as
primary for directional control, we can generate a maximum performance
turn without a subsequent roll-off.
To determine whether we should use conventional techniques or the
rudder technique, we need only recognize the “feel” of the aircraft. The
moment the outboard wing appears to be heavy, the pilot should
54

neutralize aileron and apply rudder to control the turn or roll. Full
rudder should not be employed, otherwise the pilot will experience a
loss of directional control. Instead, apply rudder smoothly and as needed
to maintain directional control. If this is accomplished, the ball will be
centered and a max-performance maneuver is possible. Do not arbitrarily
use full rudder and opposite aileron to achieve a max-performance turn. If
this is accomplished, a large amount of favorable yaw will be generated and
a snap-roll or spin will probably occur.
The Scissors Maneuver
The scissors is a defensive maneuver in which a series of turn
reversals is executed in an attempt to achieve offensive potential after an
overshoot by an attacker. To successfully employ the scissors, the defender
needs an initial turn overshoot. In a defensive turn, if an attacker attempts
to position himself in his opponent’s angular velocity cone by remaining in
the plane of his turn, the defender is provided the opportunity to generate
an overshoot. The overshoot places the attacker on the opposite side of
the defender’s angular velocity cone. If the defender continues to turn in
the same direction after the overshoot, the attacker will be presented the
opportunity to maneuver toward his opponent’s six-o’clock position, simply
because the defender will be turning away from the attack. To prevent this,
the defender must initiate a turn reversal as the attacker passes through his
flight path. The decision as to when to execute this reversal will depend
upon the attacker’s rate of overshoot and his angle-off. A good “rule-ofthumb” is: rapid turn overshoot, early reversal; slow turn overshoot, late
reversal. The turn reversal will rotate the defender’s angular velocity cone
away from the attacker. This will place the attacker at a high angle-off and
will cause him, once again, to cross the defender’s flight path. See figure 22.
The defender has now forced the attacker into a scissors maneuver.
We can see – by geometric inspection – that the aircraft which has
the shorter turn radius and the lower velocity, will force the other to the
12-o’clock position. In this maneuver, the defender has the advantage.
By virtue of forcing the attacker to overshoot, he has lower velocity and
if he employs the proper technique, he can easily place the attacker at
12-o’clock. To accomplish this, each turn reversal should be a rudder
reversal, at max-performance. If aileron is applied, the defender will
roll off in the wrong direction, or be forced to release back-pressure to
execute the reversal. This, of course, will increase turn radius. A nose-high
attitude accomplishes two things: (1) It reduces the defender’s horizontal
turning component, and (2) It reduces the defender’s vector velocity in the
horizontal plane. The reduction in the horizontal turning component and
vector velocity is a result of maneuvering through both the vertical and
horizontal planes. In other words, we are employing the pull of

55

one-G gravity to provide a greater radial G and a lower velocity. Maximum
power should be used in this maneuver, because its force vector opposes
the one-G gravity and is directed toward the inside of the turning circle.
This provides the defender the opportunity to maneuver through the
vertical plane, and thereby diminish his horizontal turning component. In
addition, since power provides a lower stall speed, it allows the defender to
tighten his turn radius at a given airspeed as well as reduce airspeed to the
lowest possible point. This means that if the defender performs a nosehigh rudder reversal with power on, he will reduce his turn and velocity
components to their smallest state and, if the attacker doesn’t counter
in like manner, he will be quickly forced to the 12-o’clock position. The
defender now becomes the attacker.
If the attacker counters effectively, and forces the defender below him,
the defender should maneuver in phase with the attacker. This provides
the attacker a visual disadvantage since the defender will be directly
beneath him. In an attempt to maneuver, in relation to the defender, the
attacker will be force to roll excessively in one direction or the other. This
increases his stall speed and forces him forward and down toward his
opponent’s flight path. The moment the attacker notices this, he probably
will reduce his bank and maneuver as smoothly as the defender, with a
resultant standoff. If, and when, this occurs,, the defender must employ
afterburner, relax G and dive 180° away from his opponent. He should
initiate this maneuver immediately after the attacker has made his last
observation, when the attacker does not have visual contact. This affords
the defender the opportunity to gain considerable longitudinal separation
and places the attacker in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach.
The defender will be out of gun range and the attacker will be provided the
worst possible situation for a missile launch. (NOTE: Tactical analysis of
the dive-away will be discussed later.)
When employing the scissors maneuver, a pilot should attempt to
secure an advantage as quickly as possible – certainly by the second turn
reversal. If not, he will lose airspeed rapidly, therefore maneuverability, and
will be prevented from ever acquiring an advantage. Instead, he will find
himself in a standoff, with marginal control – an easy set-up for another
attacker (or his immediate opponent, if the opponent has a superior
aircraft).
Procedures for the Scissors Maneuver
1. Increase rate of turn into the attack until the attacker overshoots or
moves outside the turn.
2. Execute a nose-high rudder reversal with power on as the attacker
passes your tail. Remember the “rule-of-thumb” for turn-reversal: Rapid
turn overshoot, early reversal; slow turn overshoot, late reversal.
56

SCISSORS
Figure 22
57

3. Repeat a nose-high reversal each time your opponent slides
through your flight path to the outside of the turn. If you pass nose-high
above your opponent, he will begin to slide forward.
4. Perform a roll-off or “S” down to the six-o’clock position, after you
obtain a position above and behind your opponent.
5. Place yourself in phase with your opponent if you are underneath
him; then, at the earliest possible moment, perform the 180° dive-away.
Countering the Scissors Maneuver
In our discussion of the scissors maneuver, we stated that it is a
defensive maneuver designed to take advantage of an attacker’s overshoot.
We then proceeded to show how the defender would react to gain this
advantage. The implication is clear – an attacker places himself in a very
serious position if he misjudges the defender’s turn and overshoots. To
prevent this, it is suggested that the attacker employ the high-speed yo-yo
any time he believes his rate of closure may be sufficient to cause a turn
overshoot. In this manner, the attacker can retain his offensive advantage,
however, we will still have the problem: What can an attacker do in the
event he misjudges his opponent’s turn and is force into an overshoot? The
purpose in discussing maneuvers after a turn overshoot is to point out an
effective counter to the scissors and, by means of this counter, show that
the scissors is highly over-rated as an easy method by which to achieve an
offensive advantage.
To know how to counter a scissors maneuver, we must first determine
the attacker’s maneuvering potential in respect to the defender: The
attacker has a significant disadvantage in terms of velocity; however, this
disadvantage can be converted to an advantage if the attacker knows
how to employ it properly. Maneuvering into a nose-high scissors is not
proper employment, as this will place him forward or above his opponent
in a stalemate condition. On the other hand, if the attacker employs this
velocity in the vertical plane, in a zoom maneuver, he can generate a
significant advantage. How can this advantage be gained? As the attacker
noes that he is overshooting his opponent’s turn, he should relax G and
deliberately slide around the outside of the turn. Relaxing G serves a twofold purpose: (1) It reduces induced drag, thereby allowing the attacker to
maintain an airspeed advantage, and (2) It increases lateral separation on
the overshoot. This reduces the attacker’s velocity component along the
axis of his opponent’s flight path, thus allowing the attacker to maintain
nose-tail separation. The defender, observing the overshoot, will be enticed
to execute a nose-high reversal in an attempt to gain offensive advantage.
If the defender continues the turn, the attacker can play the maneuver and,
once again, slide into the defender’s angular velocity cone. In

58

view of this, a reversal is almost a sure thing. As the defender reverses, the
attacker rolls wings-level and zooms, at a max-rotation-angle, through
the vertical plane. See figure 23. The defender will be unable to match
the attacker’s rotation angle and subsequent zoom because of his airspeed
disadvantage. This means that the attacker, even though he has a higher
airspeed, may reduce his horizontal vector velocity to a smaller value than
that of his opponent. As a result, the attacker will be on top with nosetail separation, and the defender will have dissipated his airspeed, with a
consequent loss of maneuvering potential. The attacker need only roll off
to the defender’s six-o’clock position.
If the defender pulls up into a banked attitude, toward the attacker’s
rotation, the height of his pull-up will be even less. This is the result of two
factors: (1) The defender’s pull-up is only a component of a straight pullup – his rotation angle is through both the vertical and horizontal planes.
Since he is in a banked attitude, this means that his rotation angle in the
vertical plane must be less than a straight pull-up. (2) The defender’s stall
speed is higher. In a banked attitude, stall speed increases because less
lifting surface is available to counter the pull of gravity. Higher stall speed
causes the rotation component in the vertical plane to be even less. As a
result of these two factors, the defender’s rotation angle is reduced. This
means that the height of the zoom in the vertical plane is less and vector
velocity in the horizontal plane is increased. This forces the defender to
turn below, in front of and across the attacker’s line of flight. The attacker
need only roll off in a direction opposite his opponent’s turn and move
toward the six-o’clock position. The roll-off increases nose-tail separation
and prevents a possible overshoot by the attacker.
To maneuver against the attacker’s counter, the defender simply
cannot refuse to reverse and continue his defensive turn. If he does, the
attacker will not be obligated to roll wings-level and zoom in the vertical
plane. The defender will turn away and place his angular velocity cone in
front of the attacker’s flight path. As a consequence, the attacker will simply
play his opponent’s turn and maneuver toward the six-o’clock position.
If the defender cannot pull up and turn into, or away, how then will he
maneuver against the attacker’s counter? As the attacker overshoots his
turn, the defender will execute a nose-high reversal. This will force the
attacker to roll wings-level, rotate through a large angle in the vertical
plane and zoom for altitude. This action is designed to reduce vector
velocity in the horizontal plane to a value less than the defender’s velocity.
If the attacker fails to generate this large rotation, his vector velocity will
be greater, and he will be force toward the defender’s twelve-o’clock-high
position. So we see, the attacker has no choice, he must rotate through a
large vertical angle when the defender executes his nose-high attitude and
provides considerable vertical displacement in respect to the defender.
Having placed the attacker in this position, the defender turns 180°

59

Figure 23

60

COUNTERING A SCISSORS MANEUVER

in the vertical plane, relaxes G, lights afterburner and dives for separation.
(The defender must accomplish his turn before dissipating too much
airspeed and acquiring an extreme nose-high condition.) Noting the
dive for separation, the attacker must turn – from an extreme nose-high
position – 180° in the vertical plane to regain an offensive position at
six-o’clock. The pull of one-G gravity causes the attacker to dissipate
considerable airspeed, thus placing him in an overhead attack with a
negative delta Mach outside of gun range.
Remember: The counter to the scissors maneuver is nothing more
than a high-speed yo-yo initiated after a turn overshoot. The only
difference is that the attacker relaxes G, rolls wings-level and zooms in the
vertical plane, so that he may regain nose-tail separation.
Procedures for Countering the Scissors Maneuver
1. Realize that you are overshooting your opponent’s turn and can no
longer effect a yo-yo maneuver.
2. Do not attempt to pull into the target’s radius of turn. This will
impose high G-loads, and possible buffet or stall will occur. All airspeed
advantage will be lost.
3. Relax G, slide around the outside of the turn, and thereby maintain
an airspeed advantage.
4. Roll level, and zoom up (wings-level) as your opponent reverses
into you. When your opponent reverses, he will be unable to match your
zoom, because he will have killed some of his airspeed on the reversal,
besides having less airspeed to begin with.
5. Continue to pull up, wings-level, and force your opponent forward
and below your line of flight. If he pulls up into a banked attitude, he
cannot counter your maneuver, since: (a) His stall speed is higher, and (b)
His pull-up is only a component of a straight pull-up. If your opponent
pulls up wings-level, he cannot match your rotation, because of your
airspeed advantage. In any case, your rotation in the vertical plane will be
greater than your opponent’s. This will place him below and forward of
your line of flight. You will have nose-tail separation.
6. Roll off – roll in a direction away from your opponent’s turn if he
is in a banked attitude – and more into his six-o’clock position. The rolloff will provide additional nose-tail separation and will prevent a possible
overshoot.
Procedures for maneuvering Against a Scissor Counter
1. Play the defensive turn in an attempt to force the attacker to
overshoot your flight path.
61

2. Reverse nose-high, as you observe your opponent overshooting
your turn radius. Remember: A decision as to when to reverse will depend
upon how rapidly the attacker is sliding to the outside – rapid turn
overshoot, early reversal; slow turn overshoot, late reversal.
3. Determine if your opponent rolls wings-level, rotates and zooms in
the vertical plane or commits himself to the scissors maneuver. If he zooms
in the vertical plane, follow the procedures below; otherwise employ the
procedures specified for the scissors maneuver.
4. Force your opponent into an extreme nose-high attitude and a high
resulting zoom, by pulling nose-high toward his line of flight. The attacker
must rotate nose-high and zoom for considerable altitude to counter your
nose-high pull-up. His purpose is, of course, to reduce his vector velocity
in the horizontal plane in order to maintain nose-tail separation.
5. Turn 180° in a vertical plane, relax G, light afterburner and dive
for separation. This maneuver should be initiated prior to dissipating too
much airspeed – otherwise, it will be difficult to gain separation. If done
properly, the attacker will be placed in an overhead attack with a negative
delta Mach outside gun range.
The Attack
The purpose of the attack is to position ourselves in the defender’s
angular velocity cone, so that we may deliver our ordnance and effect a
kill. Since the angular velocity cone of AIM-9B is considerably greater than
the 20mm cone, we will first try for a set-up to launch a missile. Knowing
AIM-9B’s capabilities, we will try to attack our target from six-o’clock
low. If the defender notes our position, we can expect him to perform
a defensive turn into the attack so as to rotate his angular velocity cone
away from us. If he accomplishes this, we will be unable to successfully
launch a missile because of its lambda limitation. Instead, we will be forced
to diminish range until we reach a point where lambda limit will not be
exceeded. If we attempt to fly a pursuit curve attack – track the target with
our fixed sight – to this point, our angle-off will increase and a further
reduction in range will be required before launch. By the time we reach
the range at which we can launch without exceeding lambda limit, we will
have exceeded the missile’s 2G launch limitation. As we get closer, G will
continue to build up and the opportunity to employ AIM-9B will be lost.
We are now forced to initiate a gun attack.
Our position is not satisfactory for a gun attack. In our pursuit curve
approach, we built up a substantial angle-off, but now we are faced with
the prospect of diminishing this angle-off in order to reduce our angular
velocity to enable us to track the target. As we attempt to accomplish this,
we can expect the defender to tighten his

62

turn to prevent us from doing so. We, in turn, will be forced to counter.
Result: If we continue the attack, in the plane of our opponent’s turn, we
will slide through his flight path and to the opposite side of the angular
velocity cone. Under the circumstances, we can expect the defender to
counter with a scissors maneuver. To prevent this, we have to employ a
different technique in the initial attack.
In the initial missile attack, the worst error which we can commit is
to fly a pursuit curve attack – in other words, continuously track the target
with our fixed sight in an attempt to launch AIM-9B. This forces us to
continuously increase our angle-off and prevents us from ever launching.
It also prevents us from salvaging the situation by initiating a gun attack.
At the same time, the pursuit curve causes a turn overshoot and sets up the
defender for a successful scissors maneuver. To prevent the defender from
generating these favorable relationships, we should not fly our gunsight
(pursuit curve) after the defender initiates his defensive turn. Instead,
we should attempt to generate a rate of turn almost equal to that of the
defender. (We must not match his rate of turn, for if we do, he will have
rotated into the position of attacker at the end of 180° of turn.) By doing
this, we keep our flight path or fuselage in the same relative direction as the
defender. In other words, we prevent the large increase in angle-off. This
prevents us from launching AIM-9B; however, as we approach gun range,
this positions us at a smaller angle-off and much nearer our opponent’s
angular velocity cone. To counter, the defender is forced to tighten up
his turn much sooner than in a pursuit curve attack. This means that the
defender is forced to maintain a max-performance turn for a longer time
period, in an attempt to generate an overshoot. This causes a greater speed
decay, a loss of angular velocity and a loss of future maneuvering potential
as we enter gun firing range. As a result, the defender has a more difficult
time generating an overshoot and a subsequent scissors. If he exercises
poor judgment and is lacking in stick and rudder technique, he may never
effect the overshoot. The result is obvious: We simply shoot him down.
On the other hand, if his judgment and stick and rudder technique are
excellent, we will still be force to overshoot if we continue to press the
attack in the plane of his turn.
To prevent an overshoot, we should zoom or yo-yo off the defender if we
are unable to stay inside his turn radius.
Procedures for the Initial Attack
1. Stalk you target in an attempt to position yourself for a six-o’clocklow missile attack.
2. Do not attempt to track or launch AIM-9B at max-effective range,
if the defender turns into the attack. Instead, position the gunsight reticle
ahead of the target
63

3. Check that your fuselage is pointing in the same relative direction
as the defender’s fuselage. This will help prevent overshoot.
4. Continue the cutoff to close upon the target. However, attempt to
gradually reduce angle-off as range diminishes, in an effort to launch a
missile. If this is impossible, disregard the missile and continue the cutoff
to set up for a gun attack.
5. Play the cutoff, in an effort to reduce angle-off and slide inside the
defender’s 20mm angular velocity cone.
6. Press the attack until you realize it will be impossible to stay inside
the defender’s turn radius. At this point, zoom or yo-yo off the target to
prevent overshoot and a subsequent scissors maneuver.
High-Speed Yo-Yo
The high-speed yo-yo is an offensive tactic in which the attacker
maneuvers through both the vertical and horizontal planes to prevent
an overshoot in the plane of the defender’s turn. See figure 24. From
this definition, the purpose of the maneuver is obvious: To maintain an
offensive advantage by keeping nose-tail separation between the attacker
and defender. In other words, the high-speed yo-yo is a counter for the
defensive turn and the scissors maneuver. As an attacker, when it becomes
apparent that it will be impossible to stay inside the defender’s turn radius,
employ the high-speed yo-yo.
To perform the maneuver correctly, timing is essential. To illustrate:
if an attacker is conservative and yo-yos high early, he can expect the
defender to lower his nose and dive for separation. The defender, noting
the early yo-yo, realizes it will be foolhardy to continue his turn or to pull
up into the attack. If he continues the turn, the defender will dissipate
his airspeed and his angular velocity. Consequently, the attacker will be
permitted to reduce range and slide down into the defender’s angular
velocity cone. If the defender pulls up into the attack, he dissipates airspeed
and angular velocity even more rapidly. Again, the attacker is provided the
opportunity to diminish range and roll or slide into his opponent’s angular
velocity cone. The defender cannot counter, because he has no further
maneuvering potential.
In view of the above, the defender’s best maneuver is to dive away
and gain separation. By doing this, he places the attacker out of gun range
and in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach – the worst possible
attack with AiM-9B.
If the attacker yo-yos late, it will be difficult for him to maintain nosetail separation. He will either be directly on top of the

64

Figure 24

65
HIGH-SPEED YO-YO

defender or will slide to the defender’s twelve-o’clock-high position. If this
occurs, we can expect the defender to reverse and pull up into the attacker.
By doing this, he will dissipate his airspeed and reduce his vector velocity
along the horizontal axis, thus giving the defender the opportunity to
maneuver toward the attacker’s six-o’clock-low position. The attacker now
becomes the defender.
We can see that to maintain offensive advantage, the attacker must
not be too conservative and yo-yo early nor too aggressive and yo-yo late.
Rather, he must play the yo-yo for a middle position in order to prevent the
defender from diving away or pulling up into the attack. Excellent timing
and skillful stick and rudder technique are required to attain this position.
The moment the attacker realizes that he will be unable to stay inside
his opponent’s turn radius, he should roll away from the defender’s turn
and pull his nose through the vertical plane. The purpose of this action is
to diminish his turning component and vector velocity in the plane of the
defender’s turn. To acquire max effectiveness, the attacker must maintain
back pressure and employ rudder as primary control for directional change
in the vertical plane. For proper perspective, this means that the attacker
rolls toward the vertical plane just enough to provide him an angle of bank
smaller than that of his opponent. This forces the attacker’s flight path
to describe an arc through both the vertical and horizontal planes (we
assume that the defender is turning, more or less, through the horizontal
plane). As a result, the attacker’s turning component and vector velocity are
diminished in respect to the defender’s turning and velocity components
in the plane of the defender’s turn. This allows the attacker to maintain
nose-tail separation while turning inside his opponent. At the same time,
the control technique employed – back pressure and rudder as primary
control for the maneuver – not only allows the attacker to reduce his turn
and velocity components to their smallest value, but also reduces his yo-yo
apex. This provides the defender very little maneuvering freedom with
which to counter the high-speed yo-yo. If the attacker does not use rudder
as primary control for the roll into the yo-yo he will be force to relax back
pressure. His turn radius and velocity will increase and his induced drag
will decrease. So, to maintain hose-tail separation and prevent a turn
overshoot, the attacker will be forced to yo-yo to a higher apex point.
This provides the defender the option of diving away to gain separation
and, of course, places the attacker in an overhead attack with a negative
delta Mach. If the attacker attempts to employ ailerons and maintain back
pressure, adverse yaw will preclude the yo-yo maneuver. As a result, the
attacker will probably be force to overshoot his opponent and will be
caught in a scissors maneuver.
If the attacker employs the high-speed yo-yo correctly, the effect of
one-G gravity on turn and velocity will provide nose-tail separation

66

with little vertical displacement low yo-yo apex. The attacker need only
roll or slide down to his opponent’s six-o’clock position. The attacker
should employ roll if he has little nose-tail separation. The roll reduces
his vector velocity along the axis of the roll. This provides the attacker
separation and thus prevents a possible overshoot. To perform the roll
successfully, the attacker should continuously release back pressure as he
rolls from 90° up to the inverted position – 180° – then gradually increase
back-pressure as he approaches the 270° point and continue the increase
of back-pressure until the 360° point. From the 180° through to the 360°
point, the attacker should employ top rudder. If the attacker fails to employ
this stick and rudder technique, he will roll underneath his opponent in an
obvious over-shoot – his offensive advantage seriously compromised. From
our discussion of the high-speed yo-yo, we may have implied that this
maneuver is the ultimate in countering a perfectly-executed defensive turn
with a follow-up scissors. This is not the case. If the attacker yo-yos too far
behind or too high, the defender can relax G, light afterburner and dive
away for separation. This places the attacker in an overhead attack with a
negative delta Mach. If the attacker yo-yos high and maintains very little
nose-tail separation, the defender can pull up into the attack and secure a
six-o’clock-low position. If the attacker perfectly executes the high-speed
yo-yo, the defender still has an out if he exercises excellent judgment and
skillful technique.
To counter the high-speed yo-yo, the defender must first play the attack in
an attempt to force an overshoot. Naturally, we can expect the attacker to
yo-yo high to maintain his advantage. The defender must now determine
the attacker’s relative position and attitude before making the next move.
If the attacker generates extreme vertical separation, the defender must
immediately relax G, light afterburner, and dive 180° away. If the attacker
executes the high-speed yo-yo properly, the defender has little opportunity
to dive away. If the defender pulls up, he will only position himself at
12-o’clock, and if he maintains his turn, he will dissipate his airspeed and
angular velocity. The attacker will then merely slide down to his six-o’clock
position and finish him off. To understand the counter which the defender
must employ, let’s examine the spatial relationship of the attacker in respect
to the defender. The attacker, although in a most favorable position with
his nose-tail separation and low yo-yo apex, is not set up in the defender’s
angular velocity cone to deliver his weapons at this instant. However, if the
defender takes no action, the attacker will assume the proper position for
weapons delivery. The defender, realizing this, knows his salvation lies in
maneuverability – airspeed and angular velocity. Therefore, the defender
must relax G when the attacker yo-yos off and, at the same time, he should
maintain his angle of bank. As a result, his nose will drop slightly below
the horizon, thus helping him to keep his maneuvering airspeed. Also, as
we shall see, it forces the attacker to commit himself. Upon observing the
greater turn radius and the nose-down condition, the

67

attacker has the option of maintaining his yo-yo apex or committing
himself to an attack against the descending defender. It is obvious that
the attacker is committed to press his advantage. If not, the defender will
increase separation and place the attacker in an undesirable overhead
position with a negative delta Mach. Knowing this, the attacker drops
his nose and attempts to set up for a missile launch or 20mm attack. The
defender, observing this commitment, employs top rudder and back
pressure to pull up into the attack. He has approximately two seconds
to start this maneuver – the amount of time which the attacker needs to
successfully deliver an IR missile. Or to initiate a 20mm cannon attack.
If the defender waits for the commitment and counters correctly, the
attacker will be place in a nose-low condition, while the defender has a
nose-high attitude. The attacker’s airspeed, in respect to the defender, will
be increased and his rate of turn will be less. (If the attacker’s rate of turn
were the same or greater than that of the defender, he would block out
the defender and slide in front.) At the same time, since the attacker is
approaching the horizontal position and the defender the vertical position,
the attacker’s radial G, in respect to his total G, is less as compared to
the defender’s radial G in respect to his total G. Since the attacker’s
airspeed is greater, his rate of turn is less, and because he has a lower
radial G relationship, his radius of turn must be greater (radius of turn =
Fighter velocity squared divided by rate of turn). The result is obvious:
The attacker will be forced into an overshoot, below and forward of the
defender’s line of flight. See figure 25. To gain the offensive, the defender
need only roll or slide down to the attacker’s six-o’clock position. Once
again, if the defender has little nose-tail separation, and enough vertical
displacement, he should employ the roll in order to achieve an advantage.
To successfully maneuver against a defender’s countering pull-up, the
attacker must keep in mind the relationships involved: The pull of one-G
gravity causes the attacker’s airspeed and turn radius to increase in respect
to the defender. Therefore, the attacker’s advantage lies not in turn, but in
airspeed in respect to the defender. We stated that the purpose of the highspeed yo-yo was to maintain nose-tail separation, and that it was acquired
by turning through the vertical plane as the defender turns through a plane
intersecting the plane of the defender’s turn. Result: The attacker’s line of
flight provides nose-tail separation along with some lateral separation in
the vertical plane. Nose-tail separation prevents a possible reverse by the
defender.
In our present situation, the attacker has the same problems of trying
to maintain nose-tail separation, however, he can maintain this separation
by turning in a plane away from the defender’s turn. The attacker merely
rolls one quarter away from the defender’s line of flight at the instant he
observes the defender’s rolling pull-up. At the same time, he begins a
smooth pull-up behind the defender’s line

68

Figure 25
69
COUNTERING THE HIGH SPEED YO-YO

of flight. See figure 26. The attacker plays his pull-up so that he does not
overshoot the defender’s original altitude. (An overshoot here would be
the same as an overshoot in the horizontal plane before executing a highspeed yo-yo). Since the attacker starts from a high position, his airspeed
at the bottom of the pull-up will be greater than his opponent’s at the
same level, with a consequent advantage. If the defender continues his
pull-up, the attacker zooms above and rolls behind the defender – the
attacker’s airspeed advantage pays off. If the defender attempts to dive
away, the attacker cuts off through the horizontal plane and moves into the
defender’s six-o’clock position.
The defender can counter the attacker’s one-quarter roll-away. When
the attacker is near the bottom of his pull-up, his airspeed is max; while the
defender, near the top of the zoom, has minimum airspeed. The attacker
has not only generated nose-tail separation but also lateral separation in
the vertical plane. To counter this situation, the defender must rotate his
angular velocity cone away from the attacker. In other words, he turns
from a nose-high to a nose-low position, through the vertical plane, into
the attack. This places the defender in a nose-low, nose quarter attack, with
the defender’s airspeed increasing and the attacker’s airspeed decreasing.
The defender now relaxes G, lights afterburner and dives for separation.
Meanwhile,the attacker must turn 180° through the vertical plane, to
acquire a six-o’clock position. During this maneuver, the attacker continues
to dissipate airspeed. By the time he completes the maneuver, he is placed
in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach, well outside 20mm
cannon range. The defender can easily frustrate a possible missile launch.
Procedures for the High-Speed Yo-Yo
1. Attempt to reduce angle-off and stay on the inside of the turn as
range diminishes.
2. Maintain back-pressure, employ top rudder and roll away from the
turn, up through the vertical plane, when you can no longer stay inside
your opponent’s turn radius. As the pipper slides behind the target – you
are no longer matching your opponent’s turn – you must zoom off to
prevent an overshoot. In other words, any time it becomes impossible to
maintain parallel-fuselage with your opponent, your angle-off will be too
great and you must zoom into a high-speed yo-yo.
3. Play the zoom so as to maintain nose-tail separation and yet retain
a low yo-yo apex. If proper stick and rudder technique is employed, this is
easily accomplished.
4. Roll, or slide down to your opponent’s six-o’clock position. Employ
the roll, if you have nose-tail separation, to acquire a six-o’clock advantage.

70

Figure 26
71
COUNTERING THE DEFENDER’S PULLUP

5. Use extreme caution when dropping down to your opponent’s sixo’clock position. Do not acquire a steep nose-down attitude, otherwise your
opponent may reverse up into you. This is a difficult situation to recover
from. However, if it does occur, employ the following procedures.
6. Roll one-quarter turn away from your opponent’s line of flight, the
instant your opponent begins a pull-up, and you recognize a steep noselow attitude as you approach tracking range. This maneuver will provide
nose-tail separation and lateral separation in the vertical plane.
7. Initiate a smooth pull-up – after the quarter-roll – without
overshooting your opponent’s original altitude, continue the pull-up, turn
and zoom toward his six-o’clock position. If your opponent attempts to
dive away, cut off in the horizontal plane and slide toward his six-o’clock
position.
Procedures for Countering the High-Speed Yo-Yo
1. Play the attack in an attempt to force your opponent to overshoot.
This will force him to counter with a yo-yo maneuver, in order to maintain
his offensive advantage.
2. Determine whether or not the attacker is going high and to the
rear. If he has an extremely high rate of closure, he may be forced into
extreme altitude separation. If so, employ the dive-away for separation and
place the attacker in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach. If the
attacker maintains nose-tail separation, and a low yo-yo apex, employ the
procedures outline below:
3. Maintain angle of bank and relax G, as your opponent slides high.
This will place you in a slight descent and will allow you to maintain
airspeed for future maneuvering potential. At the same time, it will force
your opponent to commit himself to a nose-low attack. Continue to
maneuver until he does so.
4. Perform a hard-rolling reversal – with rudder and back pressure –
up into the attack. This will cause your opponent to overshoot below and
forward of your line of flight, or force him to employ the quarter roll-away.
If he overshoots below, simply roll or “S” down toward his six-o’clock
position. If he employs the quarter roll-away, employ the procedures below.
5. Continue to zoom, and turn through the vertical plane down
toward your opponent as he crosses your flight path and begins his zoom
toward your angular velocity cone.

72

6. Relax G, light afterburner and dive for separation. This forces the
attacker to perform a 180° turn through the vertical plane to get back into
your six-o’clock position. By the time this is accomplished, you will have
placed him out of 20mm cannon range and in an overhead attack with a
negative delta Mach.
Barrel-Roll Attack
The high-speed yo-yo appears to be an excellent offensive maneuver
to use any time an attacker has a rate of closure and cannot match an
opponent’s defensive turn. Generally, this is true; however, in a situation in
which an attacker approaches a defender at high angle-off (40° or more)
and long range (10,000 feet or more) the high speed yo-yo has questionable
value. Under these circumstances an attacker would have to yo-yo to an
extremely high apex to maintain nose-tail separation and stay inside his
opponent’s turn radius. Naturally, if this occurs, we can expect the defender
to immediately dive for separation and airspeed. The attacker is placed
in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach. This means that he
must initiate a new attack. Noting this, the defender turns into the attack
and generates a high angle-off at long range, and forces the attacker into
another yo-yo with high vertical displacement. Once again, the attacker
performs a new attack and the process repeats itself. The result is obvious:
if the defender counters each attack successfully, the attacker gains little
additional advantage and a stalemate exists. The purpose of the barrel-roll
attack is to prevent this stalemate from developing.
Geometric examination of this situation – high angle-off, long-range
attack – reveals that the attacker would not prefer to execute the yo-yo
in this manner. Instead, he would appreciate the opportunity to reduce
his angle-off and slide into the defender’s angular velocity cone, without
the defender being able to gain longitudinal separation. In other words,
the attacker would like to reduce his velocity, cut off, and turn inside his
opponent, then regain his velocity after he diminishes his angle-off, and
slide toward his opponent’s six-o’clock position. Is this possible? Yes, if we
know how to correctly apply the three-dimensional concept of turn and
velocity. As previously stated in the introduction to fighter maneuvers, it is
possible to reduce turn and velocity by two methods: (1) Through both the
vertical and horizontal planes by employing a two-dimensional maneuver
(yo-yo) or (2) Maneuver through both the vertical and horizontal planes
by employing a tree-dimensional maneuver (barrel-roll). Thus far, our
emphasis has been on the first method. Now, we will employ both methods
to solve our present dilemma – to reduce airspeed and angle-off, then
regain airspeed to prevent longitudinal separation.
How do we apply this tree-dimensional concept? If the attacker
attempts to barrel-roll, in the plane of the opponent’s turn, he will reduce
his vector velocity along the axis of the roll. However, the
73

roll will provide a line of flight tangent to his intended turn, which will
increase his angle-off and improve the possibility of an overshoot. If the
roll is conducted in the vertical plane – combined with a high-speed yoyo – there is a different result: (1) There is less vertical displacement than
in an ordinary yo-yo, because vector velocity along the axis of the roll,
in the vertical plane, is diminished, (2) Component velocity, in the plane
of the defender’s turn, is diminished as a result of the yo-yo and the roll,
(3) Aircraft velocity is greater, as a result of the lower yo-yo apex and the
shortening effect which the roll has on the velocity vector in the plane of
the defender’s turn. The shortening effect allows the attacker to diminish
his rotation angle through the vertical plane. This provides less speed
decay, hence greater aircraft velocity, and (4) There will be no overshoot,
as a result of the roll, since the roll is not conducted in the plane of the
defender’s turn. Upon further examination, we can see that if the attacker is
able to initiate this yo-yo with a roll, from below his opponent, he increases
his opportunity to gain a favorable position. By initiating the maneuver
from an inside-low position, the attacker lowers the apex of the maneuver.
This provides the defender less opportunity to gain separation. The only
problem now is that the attacker must be able to apply this concept of turn
and velocity against his opponent.
To set up the maneuver, the attacker must dive below and inside his
opponent’s defensive turn. We assume that the attacker has the range/
angle-off relationship specified above, and a dive below will provide the
attacker some additional airspeed. However, this will not increase his
vertical displacement above his opponent, since he can easily kill airspeed
upon his forthcoming rotation through the vertical plane. If the attacker
approaches the target from below and at a high angle-off, he continues to
cut off, in an attempt to reduce angle-off, until he reaches his pull-up point.
The attacker pulls up on the inside of his opponent’s defensive turn, then
barrel-rolls in a direction away from his opponent’s turn. If his opponent’s
defensive turn is toward the left, he rolls right; if the turn is toward the
right, he rolls left. The roll is not a high-G barrel roll (the attacker is trying
to kill vector velocity, not aircraft velocity). As the attacker rolls nose-high
through the inverted position, he plays back-pressure and kicks bottom
rudder to obtain a nose-low 270° change of direction. See figure 27. During
this portion of the maneuver – from the inverted position to the 270°point
of the roll – the attacker receives the benefit of 1G gravity which assists
him in gaining a rapid change of direction toward the defender’s six-o’clock
position. If the attacker has played the entire maneuver – from pull-up
through the roll – on the inside of the opponent’s defensive turn, he will
find himself above, at a reduced angle-off and in a position to dive below
his opponent’s line of flight for a six-o’clock-low position. Longitudinal
separation will not be great, for two reasons: (1) Vector velocity is reduced,
but a high aircraft velocity is retained, and, (2) The entire maneuver

74

Figure 27

75
BARREL-ROLL ATTACK

is performed inside the defender’s turn radius. The offensive roll-away
places the attacker outside of gun range. But inside AIM-9B range at sixo’clock low. Whether the attacker can launch or not, depends on how his
opponent plays the defensive turn. If the defender tightens his turn and
attempts to counter the maneuver, he will experience high speed decay, his
angular velocity will be reduced and the attacker will find it easy to set up
for a missile launch. On the other hand, if the defender does not tighten his
turn, his airspeed and angular velocity will be greater and the attacker will
have to maneuver further, if the defender tightens his turn as the attacker
attempts to launch. In any case, we can see that the roll-away provides an
effective method by which to reduce angle-off, prevent separation and get
into an opponent’s angular velocity cone. It is tailored to the performance
of the AIM-9B.
To counter the barrel-roll attack there may appear to be certain
alternatives such as a high-G roll by the defender when the attacker
performs his 270° change of direction, or a pull-up (under the same
circumstances). The high-G roll is ineffective because this will cause the
defender’s line of flight to be tangent to his defensive turn. In addition, his
vector velocity will be reduced. As a result, the attacker can easily play his
maneuver to slide toward his opponent’s six-o’clock position and have less
longitudinal separation, since his opponent reduced his vector velocity.
The pull-up is ineffective, since the attacker is not committed to a nose-low
position by employing bottom rudder. Instead, he may employ top rudder
when rolling from the inverted position. AT the same time, the defender
must roll away from his defensive turn to execute a pull-up. This provides
the attacker with sufficient longitudinal separation and time to play his
top rudder. Result: The attacker rolls toward his opponent’s six-o’clock
position, with his opponent framed against blue sky — a perfect set-up
for a missile launch. The only effective counter for a properly executed
roll-away is a dive for separation and airspeed. The moment the attacker
initiates his pull-up, the defender should turn nose-low toward the pullup, relax G, light afterburner and dive for separation. This forces the
attacker, even though he may use the roll-away, to perform a 180° change
of direction in the vertical plane. If the attacker pulls considerable G in
acquiring this change of direction, he diminishes airspeed considerably in
respect to the defender. If the attacker plays the maneuver with less G, his
vertical displacement is greater. No matter which action he employs, he
will be placed in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach.
To maneuver against this counter, an attacker may employ some
deception. The purpose of the deception is to prevent the defender
from employing the dive for separation. Instead of pulling up inside the
defender’s turn, from an inside-low position, the attacker will pull-up to
the outside of his opponent’s turn, thus maintaining nose-tail separation.
To the defender, this will appear as an overshoot. Therefore, we can expect
him to reverse nose-high, in an effort to scissor the

76

attacker forward. However, if the attacker plays the maneuver properly –
overshoot and zoom – this will be impossible. The attacker has a three-fold
advantage in terms of airspeed, nose-tail separation, and a high rotation
angle in the vertical plane. This means that the attacker may zoom above
and behind, but outside his opponent’s turn. The defender will be unable
to match the attacker’s zoom. If the defender reverses (he most likely
will) this will place the attacker above, behind and to the inside of his
opponent’s turn. The attacker need only roll off in a direction away from
his opponent’s turn. This will reduce vector velocity, provide nose-tail
separation and thus allow the attacker to roll down toward his opponent’s
six-o’clock position. The defender will be in a poor position to counter,
since he has diminished airspeed and angular velocity as a result of his turn
and nose-high reversal. Should he attempt to pull up into the attacker, the
attacker need only employ top rudder on his roll-off toward the defender’s
six-o’clock position. If the defender dives away, the attacker employs
bottom rudder on his roll-off to prevent separation. In either case, the
attacker will be in a favorable position to fire the 20mm cannon or launch
a missile. More than likely he will be set up for a 20mm cannon attack. If
the defender does not react with a reversal, to counter the overshoot and
roll-off, but instead dives away for separation, he will place the attacker in
an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach. The separation from this
barrel-roll attack will be greater than from the one conducted on the inside
of the turn. It is difficult to determine which attack is best. However, if the
defender’s conditioned reflexes are oriented toward a scissors maneuver
– in the event of an overshoot – the attacker should employ the outside
method; if not he should employ the inside method.
The barrel-roll attack, or roll-off maneuver, need not be limited to
the conditions specified above. It may be employed at shorter ranges and
lower angles-off. The purpose is to reduce rate of closure and angle-off and
provide the defender little opportunity to gain separation. As stated earlier,
this is an especially good maneuver by which to slide into an opponent’s
AIM-9B angular velocity cone, since it provides the attacker a better
opportunity to launch against a maneuvering target.
Procedures for the Barrel-Roll Attack
1. Stalk your target and attempt to deduce angle-off as much as
possible. If this is impossible, employ the procedures outline below:
2. Dive below and inside your opponent’s turn radius, maintaining
nose-tail separation throughout the maneuvers. The dive below should be
initiated far enough out so the forthcoming zoom may be played inside or
outside the defender’s turn.

77

3. Pull up and zoom inside your opponent’s turn radius if you feel he
is not strongly oriented toward the scissors maneuver (sometimes this is
difficult to determine).
4. Barrel-roll, nose-high, in a direction away from your opponent’s
turn. If he turns right, barrel-roll left, and vice versa. The roll will reduce
vector velocity and the hight of the yo-yo apex, while maintaining a higher
aircraft velocity.
5. Continue the roll and employ bottom rudder as the aircraft comes
through the nose-high inverted position. This will provide a 270° change of
direction and place you with longitudinal separation, at a reduced angleoff above your opponent, diving toward a six-o’clock-low position. The
longitudinal separation will be less than that acquired from an ordinary
yo-yo.
6. Do not employ bottom rudder if your opponent rolls away from the
turn and pulls up into the attack. Instead, employ top rudder and continue
the roll from the inverted position. This will place you in a nose-high
attitude at six-o’clock-low – a perfect set-up for a missile launch.
7. Pull up and zoom to the outside of your opponent’s turn radius if
you feel you can sucker him into a turn-reversal. If he reverses, continue
with the following procedures.
8. Roll in a direction opposite your opponent’s turn-reversal. This will
reduce your vector velocity and help maintain longitudinal separation.
9. Play top or bottom rudder, according to whether your opponent
pulls up or dives away after the reversal. If he pulls up, employ top rudder.
This will allow you to roll nose-high toward a six-o’clock-low position. If he
dives away, employ bottom rudder. This will allow you to roll nose-low and
prevent your opponent from obtaining extreme longitudinal separation.
Procedures for Countering the Barrel-Roll maneuver
1. Play the attack in an attempt to generate angle-off and prevent your
opponent from setting up for a missile launch. If your opponent counters
with a dive below and to the inside of your turn radius, continue with the
procedures outline below.
2. Turn, nose-low toward the attack, as your opponent initiates his
pull-up from an inside-low position. This will increase his angle-off, since
you are turning into the plane of attack.

78

3. Relax G, light afterburner and dive for separation. This will force
the attacker to turn 180° in the vertical plane toward your line of flight.
During this maneuver, he will be dissipating airspeed while you will be
increasing airspeed. As a result, at the end of the 180° turn, he will be
placed in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach, beyond gunfire
range and in a poor position to launch a missile.
The Low-Speed Yo-Yo
Until now, our central theme in discussing tactics has been the
problem of overshoot. The defender’s maneuvers have been predicated
upon rate of closure. He needs rate of closure to generate an overshoot in
order to nullify an attack and gain an offensive advantage. On the other
hand, the attacker attempts to counter rate of closure, by maneuvering
through both the vertical and horizontal planes. Discussing these
maneuvers — by the attacker and defender — we assumed that the attacker
has a definite rate of closure. Now let us investigate an area in tactics in
which an attacker does not have an initial rate of closure. Assume an
attacker is at six-o’clock, outside missile range. How would he gain position
to launch a missile or deliver a 20mm cannon attack?
To gain position quickly, the attacker must light afterburner and dive
below his opponent’s flight path. In other words, trade altitude for airspeed.
After reaching an altitude of no more than 10,000 feet below his opponent,
he should level out and press the attack from a six-o’clock-low position.
The airspeed gained in this maneuver will allow the attacker to quickly
close upon his opponent. In addition, it places him in the defender’s blind
spot, with the possibility that the defender will not maneuver to protect
himself. If he does not, the attacker simply closes the distance, executes a
pull-up inside missile range and launches.
If he has no missile, the attacker moves in closer and executes
a gradual pull-up and positions himself for a gun attack. The entire
maneuver depicted here – a dive for airspeed and a pull-up for position –
we define as a yo-yo. If may be employed in a running battle or in a turning
fight any time an attacker has insufficient rate of closure.
In a turning fight, an attacker may find himself in a circular tail-chase
unable to close upon an opponent. If he tightens his turn, his opponent
counters in like manner and the attacker’s position remains unchanged.
The result is a Lufbery maneuver – a stalemate in which the attacker and
defender bleed off airspeed and altitude. If the attacker attempts a highspeed yo-yo in an attempt to break the stalemate and gain a more favorable
position, he will break the stalemate but will lose rather than gain a more
favorable position. To employ the high-speed yo-yo, the attacker must roll
away from the circular

79

tail-chase and zoom in the vertical plane. The roll-away decreases turn
rate and increases turn radius, whereas the zoom dissipates airspeed and
also decreases turn rate. The defender now has an airspeed and rate-ofturn advantage. Result: He moves around the Lufbery circle away from the
attacker’s nose, toward his tail.
To gain a more favorable position, the attacker must be able to cut
off and close upon his opponent. The purpose of a low-speed yo-yo is to
provide cut-off and rate of closure. To employ the low-speed yo-yo then in
a turning fight, the attacker simply maintains his bank and lowers his nose
to the inside of the turn (see figure 28). He is now turning through both
the vertical and horizontal planes. The pull of gravity increases aircraft
velocity, thus increasing turn radius through the vertical and horizontal
planes; however, in the horizontal plane – the plane of the defender’s turn
– his turn radius is decrease )in this plane, turn radius is only a component
of actual turn). As a result, the attacker turns below and inside his
opponent. The attacker’s angle-off and airspeed increase and his distance
– in respect to his opponent – decreases along the horizontal plane. To
prevent an overshoot, the attacker must roll wings-level, pull up and zoom
toward the defender’s six-o’clock position. The entire maneuver must be
accomplished prior to reaching the defender’s line-abreast position. If
done correctly, the attacker will find himself at a reduced angle-off and at a
diminished range. If he is still not in a lethal position, he need only repeat
the process. The attacker gains an advantage in employing this maneuver,
because airspeed loss is less than the airspeed lost by the defender. When
the attacker dives to the inside, he increases airspeed and reduces angle of
attack. The increase airspeed provides greater airflow mass to the engine,
hence the engine generates more thrust. The decrease in angle of attack
reduces induced drag and as a result, in the dive portion of the maneuver,
the attacker not only has an airspeed advantage, but also a thrust
advantage. On the pull-up to the horizon, angle of attack and induced
drag increase. This prevents and further increase in airspeed. However, at
this point, the attacker still has a considerable airspeed advantage. In the
zoom portion of the maneuver, the pull of one-G gravity starts to diminish
airspeed, the loss of airspeed starts to increase angle of attack; however,
angle of attack is less than the defender’s because of the greater radial G
available in the vertical and horizontal plane as compared to the horizontal
plane alone. Because of this, the loss of airspeed in a low-speed yo-yo is less
than the loss of airspeed in a horizontal turn through the same distance.
Therefore, the attacker gains a more favorable position even though he
goes through a greater distance.
If the attacker employs afterburner, he will find the maneuver even
more effective, even though his opponent may counter in like manner. The
afterburner is essentially a ramjet tandem to a turbo engine, therefore, its
thrust, like a ramjet, multiplies enormously

80

Figure 28

81
LOW-SPEED YO-YO

as speed increases. Because of the additional speed thus generated, the
attacker need only employ the yo-yo one time in order to gain a favorable
position. The afterburner can best be used during the descent and zoom
portion of the yo-yo, not during the pull-up to the horizon. If afterburner
is used from pull-up to the horizon, the component of afterburner thrust
acts in the same direction as the pull of gravity. Unlike max power in a
horizontal turn, this causes the attacker to describe a wider arc during the
pull-up. This may reduce the effectiveness of the maneuver. On the other
hand, if considerable longitudinal separation exists, and the low-speed
yo-yo may be performed inside the defender’s turn, employ afterburner
throughout the entire maneuver. This will enable the attacker to quickly
reduce range and zoom into his opponent’s angular velocity cone.
A defender cannot effectively counter a properly-executed low-speed
yo-yo by tightening his turn, initiating a reversal, or performing a high-G
barrel roll. If the defender tightens his turn, he dissipates his airspeed
rapidly to a point where he reduces his angular velocity and increases his
turn radius. The attacker then has no great problem in zooming up toward
his opponent’s six-o’clock position. The attacker may even play the zoom
– out of a low-speed yo-yo – so that he will overshoot his opponent’s flight
path in the horizontal plane. If the defender reverses, the attacker rolls off
in a direction opposite the defender’s turn toward his six-o’clock position.
If the defender initiates a reversal as the attacker starts into his low-speed
yo-yo, the defender will be turning away from the attack, hence rotating
his angular velocity cone toward the attacker. The attacker simply pulls
up on the inside of the reversal and maneuvers toward his opponent’s six
o’clock position. The reversal allows the attacker to reduce more G than is
possible against a tight turn, and as a result, his rate of closure increases
to enable him to gain a favorable position more rapidly. If the defender
executes a high-G roll out of his turn, he reduces vector velocity and flies
tangent to the intended turn, thus permitting the attacker to zoom out of
his low-speed yo-yo and quickly secure a six-o’clock position. The defender
will be in a poor position to counter, since the roll kills his airspeed and
maneuvering potential.
To counter a low-speed yo-yo, the defender must rotate his angular
velocity cone away from his opponent. In other words, he must turn into
the plane of the attack. From this explanation, an obvious counter-measure
appears to be a diving turn the instant an attacker begins his low-speed
yo-yo. This rotates the defender into the plane of the attack and cancels a
possible low-speed yo-yo. Of course, the two antagonists will be forced to
the deck rather quickly. If the defender rolls out of the turn his opponent
will be positioned at six o’clock. Thus the defender receives only a respite
from a stalemate situation. We can see from this illustration that a defender
must not only rotate his angular velocity cone away but also do it in such a
manner as to completely nullify his opponent’s low-speed yo-yo. He

82

can accomplish this in the following manner: the defender allows the
attacker to dive below and inside his turn until a pull-up is begun. At this
point the defender is in no immediate danger, since the attacker is diving
away from his angular velocity cone. As the attacker begins his pull-up,
from a nose-low attitude, the defender rolls away from his turn and zooms
in the vertical plane in a banked attitude. By this action, the defender
rotates his angular velocity cone toward the attacker’s line of flight.
Observing this, the attacker continues his pull-up in an effort to move
toward the defender’s six-o’clock-low position. By the time the attacker’s
nose reaches the horizon on his pull-up, the defender will be nose-high in a
bank toward the attacker with considerably less airspeed than the attacker.
At this point the defender rotates his angular velocity cone away from the
attacker by turning, from a nose-high to a nose-low position, through the
vertical plane into the attack. This places the defender in a nose-low, nosequarter attack with the defender’s airspeed increasing and the attacker’s
airspeed decreasing. The defender now plays his action according to the
attacker’s intentions. If the attacker continues his zoom and turns 180°
through the vertical plane, without cutting off, the defender relaxes G,
lights afterburner and dives for separation. This places the attacker in
an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach. On the other hand, if the
attacker cuts off and overshoots his opponent in the vertical plane, the
defender may employ a different counter – the vertical rolling scissors.
Procedures for the Low-Speed Yo-Yo.
1. Dive below and inside your opponent’s turn, if you are in a circular
tail-chase, and have little or no rate of closure. This maneuver will increase
airspeed, diminish your horizontal turning component, and allow you to
set up a rate of closure and maneuver inside your opponent’s turn.
2. Employ afterburner in the descent and in the zoom portions of
the maneuver. Do not employ afterburner during the pull-up from the
nose-low to a nose-level position. The use of afterburner in the descent
and zoom portion of the maneuver increases and helps to maintain rate of
closure. When afterburner is employed during the pull-up, a wider arc is
described, possibly ruining the effectiveness of the maneuver.
3. Do not burble the aircraft, otherwise drag is increase, airspeed is
decreased and consequently, zoom capability is diminished.
4. Shallow out your turn and begin a pull-up toward your opponent’s
six-o’clock position. This should be accomplished from an inside-low
position before you reach a position line-abreast of your opponent.

83

5. Employ afterburner as your nose comes through the horizon and
zoom toward your opponent’s six-o’clock position.
6. Repeat the low-speed yo-yo – if necessary – until a launch or firing
position is reached.
Procedures for Countering the Low-Speed Yo-Yo
1. Continue to turn and observe your opponent’s dive below and
to the inside until a pull-up is begun. You are attempting to gain lateral
separation in the vertical plane before initiating your counter-maneuver.
2. Roll away from the turn and zoom in a banked attitude toward your
opponent as he begins his pull-up. This will diminish airspeed and rotate
your angular velocity cone toward your opponent. He will maneuver in
an attempt to gain position inside this cone at six-o’clock low. As his nose
reaches the horizon, in this attempt, maneuver as outlined below.
3. Turn, from a nose-high to a nose-low attitude, through the vertical
plane into the attack. This will place you in a nose-low, nose-quarter
attack with your airspeed increasing. Your attacker will be in a zoom with
airspeed decreasing.
4. Relax G, light afterburner and dive for separation if your opponent
does not cut off and overshoot your flight path. If he attempts to cut off
and overshoots your flight path, employ the vertical rolling scissors.
Countering the Overhead Attack with a Negative Delta Mach
In our discussion of previous maneuvers, we have encountered many
situations in which the defender had to dive for separation in an effort to
gain maneuvering airspeed and to provide the attacker the worst possible
position for a missile attack – an overhead attack with a negative delta
Mach. We will now discuss possible counters to this attack.
In an overhead attack, with a negative delta Mach, the attacker is in
the worst possible position to launch an IR missile. The attacker must not
only consider IR background clutter, but the lambda and G limitations
of his missile. The lambda limit is especially important because of the
attacker’s negative rate of closure in respect to the target. If the defender
performs any defensive maneuver at all, a low relative missile velocity
will be combined with an increasing angle-off. As a result, the defender
can easily prevent a successful missile launch. G is significant because the
attacker must maneuver against one-G gravity. This means he will easily
exceed the two-G launch

84

limitation and/or the angle-of-attack limitation against a maneuvering
defender. To elude an attacker, the defender need only rotate his angular
velocity cone away from the attacker’s line of flight. In an overhead attack
with a negative delta Mach, he may accomplish this in two ways: (1) Pull
up to the horizon, wings level, and perform a defensive turn left or right
(the direction dependent upon whether the attacker is high to the left or
high to the right). Let’s discuss each alternative in detail. First the pull-up
and zoom in the vertical plane.
The moment the defender observes his opponent lining up for
a possible missile shot, he pulls up and zooms in the vertical plane.
During the pull-up– from nose-low to nose-level – he does not employ
afterburner. As his nose hits the horizon, he lights afterburner and zooms
in the vertical plane. The attacker, faced with this counter, has one of two
alternatives: (1) Cut off, in an attempt to secure a six-o’clock-low position
as the defender zooms through the vertical plane, or, (2) Do not cut off
but fly the same relative flight path as the defender. In all probability,
the attacker will be enticed into a cut-off, because he thinks the cut-off
will quickly position him for a missile launch. This, however, is what the
defender is actually hoping and waiting for. If the attacker cuts off, he will
not take advantage of the pull of gravity to build up his airspeed therefore,
at the bottom of his pullout, he will generate a lower airspeed than did
the defender when the defender was at the bottom of his pull-out. The
cut-off and lower airspeed force the attacker to reduce his rotation angle
in the vertical plane in respect to the defender. This means that he will be
unable to secure a six-o’clock position. Instead, he will be forced to accept
a smaller rotation angle, hence a flight path overshoot in the vertical plane
(see figure 29). Meanwhile, the defender with his airspeed margin, can
pull toward or past the vertical and execute a roll-off – not a loop – down
toward the attacker’s six-o’clock position. To counter, the attacker will
attempt to complete his zoom and roll-off; however, the attacker will lose
out because of his initial lower airspeed on his first cut-off and his smaller
rotation angle. As a result, the defender will quickly gain an advantage and
move toward the attacker’s six-o’clock position. If the attacker had not cut
off on the initial pull-up and zoom, but had pulled up and zoomed through
the same arc as the defender, he would not have lost his advantage. As the
defender reached the near vertical, the attacker would be near six-o’clock.
This means the defender would be unable to successfully roll off and gain a
six-o’clock advantage, since he would not have an overshoot in the vertical
plane. If he did, the attacker would simply follow and gain a more favorable
position. To prevent this, the defender must turn 180° through the vertical
plane and once again relax G and dive for separation. The attacker, noting
this, will be faced with the choice of attempting to cut-off or zoom past
the defender through the same turning point to complete a 180° change of
direction toward the defender’s six-o’clock position. If the attacker attempts
to cut off and overshoot his

85

Figure 29

86

COUNTERING THE OVERHEAD ATTACK WITH A NEGATIVE DELTA MACH

opponent in the vertical plane, the defender may employ the vertical
rolling scissors as a counter. On the other hand, if the attacker does not
cut off, the overhead attack with a negative delta Mach will be repeated
once again. To counter this second attempt, the defender may execute the
second alternative – a pull-up to the horizon and a defensive turn, left or
right. If the attacker is to the rear and off to the left, the defender will turn
left, and vice versa. If the attacker presses the attack, in a curved plane
intercepting the defender’s turn, he will describe a nose-low spiral. As
range diminishes, the attacker’s airspeed and G will build up. The defender,
observing his opponent’s attack, will tighten up his defensive turn as the
attacker’s range diminishes. If the attack is continued, the nose-low spiral
forces the attacker into an overshoot below the defender. The result is
obvious: The defender simply rolls off and maneuvers toward the attacker’s
six-o’clock position. If the attacker attempts to yo-yo out of this nose-low
spiral – before overshooting below his opponent’s flight path – he must
roll wings-level in order to pull up and zoom in the vertical plane. This
maneuver provides nose-tail separation for the attacker; however, it also
provides lateral separation for the defender. In this instance, the defender
has taken the advantage. After rolling wings-level the attacker has a noselow attitude while the defender has a nose-level attitude. This means
that the attacker must pull from this attitude to nose-level before he can
zoom in the vertical plane. During the process, the attacker increases his
horizontal velocity component. This causes him to overshoot the defender’s
flight path before he can execute his zoom. If, during the pull-up and zoom
by the attacker, the defender counters with a nose-high reversal, he will
diminish his horizontal component. The result is obvious: The attacker is
forced out front by his pull-up and zoom. The defender will be in position,
at six-o’clock low, for a missile attack.
Procedures for Countering the Overhead Attack with a Negative Delta
Mach
1. Determine if an attacker is in position to execute an overhead attack
with a negative delta Mach. This can be accomplished by observing the
attacker’s previous maneuvers and his present relative position. If he is in a
proper position, employ the following procedures.
2. Pull up from a nose-low attitude and zoom in the vertical plane
(wings level). This should be accomplished the moment the defender
observes his opponent flying up for a possible missile shot.
3. Employ afterburner during the dive and zoom portions of the
maneuver. Do not employ afterburner during the pull-up from nose-low to
nose-level. Use of the afterburner during the dive and zoom portions of the
maneuver and not during the pull-up allows the defender

87

to generate sufficient angular velocity and, at the same time, maintain a
substantial zoom capability.
4. Observe and determine if your opponent attempts a cut-off in an
effort to secure advantage. If he does, he will not take advantage of the
force of gravity to build up his airspeed. Therefore, in the bottom of his
pull-out, he will have a lower airspeed, hence a lower zoom potential as
well as a reduced rotation angle.
5. Roll off, as you approach the vertical, and maneuver down toward
your opponent’s six-o’clock position. This should be accomplished as your
opponent starts in the zoom portion of his maneuver. This will prevent
him from getting near your six-o’clock position; At the same time, it allows
you to gain toward his six-o’clock position.
6. Repeat the process. This means that you will dive toward the
attacker’s six-o’clock position from your roll-off/ This will place you at the
bottom half of the maneuver. Your attacker, attempting to complete his
zoom, will roll off toward your six-o’clock position; However, you will gain
on him because of his initial lower airspeed when he performs his first cutoff.
7. Do not attempt the roll-off if the attacker does not cut-off on the
initial maneuver. Instead, turn 180° to the vertical plane, relax G and
dive for separation. If the attacker does not cut off, he will be near your
six-o’clock position as you reach the near-vertical. To provide him little
advantage, you must turn 180° into the attack, dive for separation, and
once again place him in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach.
8. Determine, once again, when the attacker is in an overhead
attack with a negative delta Mach, then get ready to employ the second
alternative.
9. Pull up to the horizon with wings level, then perform a defensive
turn left or right (the direction is dependent upon whether the attack
is high to the left or high to the right). If the attacker counter the first
alternative, he will meet the second in an effort to gain an advantage.
10. Continue the turn and observe the attacker. If he presses the attack
in a curved plane intercepting your turn, proceed as follows:
11. Tighten up the turn, as the attacker’s range diminishes, and
attempt to force him below your line of flight, or attempt to force him into
a yo-yo out to the side. If he continues the attack, he will be forced into an
overshoot below you.

88

12. Roll off and maneuver toward the attacker’s six o’clock-low
position if the attacker continues the attack and is forced into an overshoot
below you. If he yo-yos out to the side, employ the fol­lowing procedures.
13. Reverse nose-high to force the attacker below and out front. Since
the attacker must pull up before he can zoom, his horizontal velocity will
carry him below and forward.
14. Roll off and maneuver toward the attacker’s six-o’clock-low
position as he completes his pull-up and proceeds in the zoom portion of
his maneuver.
Maneuvering from An Overhead Attack with a Negative Delta Mach
You will recall, from our previous discussions of the overhead at­
tack with a negative delta Mach, that an attacker may expect two pos­sible
counters to his attack: (1) A pull-up from a nose-low attitude, followed
by a zoom in the vertical plane, or (2) A pull-up to the horizon, wings
level, followed by a defensive turn left or right. Our purpose in discussing
the overhead attack with a negative delta Mach is to point out maneuvers
which can be used against either one of these counters.
To maneuver against the first alternative - pull-up from a nose-low
attitude with a zoom in the vertical plane - we stated that the attacker
should not cut off and pull-up and zoom. Instead, he should fly the same
relative flight path as the defender. By doing this, the attacker would
force the defender to turn 180° in the vertical plane in an at­tempt to gain
longitudinal separation. We can see, by geometrically examining this
situation, that the attacker has an apparent choice of either cutting off his
opponent in the vertical plane, or zooming past the defender through the
same turning point to complete a 180° change of direction toward the
defender’s six-o’clock position. If the at­tacker attempts to cut off and overshoots his opponent’s descending flight path in the vertical plane, he can
expect the defender to counter with the vertical rolling scissors. This will
cost him his offensive advantage. On the other hand, if he does not cut off,
the overhead attack with a negative delta Mach will be repeated once again,
and he will gain little additional advantage. To prevent either sit­uation
from occurring, the attacker need only employ a barrel-roll (roll-away) in
the vertical plane, as he starts to move past the descending defender. This
will reduce the apex of his zoom, because his vector velocity (along the
axis of the roll) in the vertical plane is diminished. As a result, the attacker
will roll away through a 180° change of direction to position himself at
his opponent’s six-o’clock low position, in the vertical plane, with much
less longitudinal separation. If the defender repeats the pull-up and zoom,
followed by a 180° turn in

89

the vertical plane, the attacker need only repeat the process to gain an even
more favorable position. He may then set up for a missile or 20mm cannon
attack.
To counter this roll-away, the defender need only add back-pressure
and roll toward the roll-away, or dive for whatever longitudinal separation
he can get to employ his second alternative. If the defender rolls toward
the roll-away, this will place the attacker at a high-angle-off in the vertical
plane, as shown in figure 30. To maneuver out of this position, the attacker
must roll 180° toward the defender’s flight path. Meanwhile, the defender
can relax G, dive for separation and attempt his second alternative.
To maneuver against the second alternative – a pull-up to the
horizon, wings-level, with a defensive turn left or right – the attacker
must not launch an overhead attack in a curved place against the rim of
the defender’s horizontal turn. This means that if the attack is pressed,
the attacker has the option of descending outside his opponent’s turning
circle or descending inside the turning circle. If the attacker descends
outside his opponent’s turning circle, his rate of turn will be less than
the defender’s. This means the defender will be turning away from the
attacker’s nose, toward his tail, as the attacker approaches the defender’s
line of flight. As a result, the defender will maneuver toward the attacker’s
six-o’clock position. On the other hand, if the attacker descends inside the
turning circle, he is not committed to generate a turn rate less and a turn
radius greater than his opponent, as would be the case if he initiated a
pursuit curve attack, in a curved plane (either intercepting the defender’s
horizontal turn or descending outside his turning circle). By descending
inside the horizontal circle, the attacker describes a nose-low spiral, in
which his rate of turn, along the horizontal axis, is governed by his spiral or
roll rate along the vertical axis. His radius of turn along the horizontal axis
is covered by the slope of his descending spiral. If the attacker increases his
roll rate (in the spiral) and steepens the spiral, he increases his horizontal
turn rate and decreases his horizontal turn radius. In effect, the attacker
will be pirouetting down the axle of the defender’s horizontal turn. This,
of course, will cause the attacker to build up excessive velocity for his
forthcoming maneuver unless he reduces power. As the attacker pulls well
inside and below the defender’s turning circle, he rolls out of the spiral and
executes a pull-up and zoom toward the defender’s six-o’clock position.
(In other words, he employs a variation of the low-speed yo-yo.) If the
attacker’s airspeed is excessive and it appears that the resulting zoom may
force him too high and/or to the outside of the defender’s turning circle,
the attacker simply employs the barrel-roll attack in an effort to secure a
launch or firing position.
To counter the inside-low maneuver (the low-speed yo-yo or the
barrel-roll attack) out of the overhead attack with a negative delta

90

Figure 30

91

MANEUVERING FROM AN OVERHEAD ATTACK WITH A NEGATIVE DELTA MACH

Mach, the defender need only employ the counters suggested for a lowspeed yo-yo and/or for the barrel-roll attack.
Procedures for Maneuvering from an Overhead Attack with a Negative
Delta Mach
1. Observe your opponent and determine if he employs alternative 1
– a pull-up from a nose-low attitude and a zoom in the vertical plane – or
alternative 2 – a pull-up to the horizon, wings-level, and a defensive turn
left or right. If he employs the first alternative use the following procedures.
2. Do not cut off as your opponent begins his pull-up for a zoom in
the vertical plane. A cut-off now will provide you a lower airspeed and a
smaller rotation angle for your forthcoming zoom.
3. Dive – afterburner on – and initiate a pull-up and zoom through
the same arc which the defender described. This technique will enable you
to generate a high rotation angle in your zoom, hence, prevent a flightpath
overshoot, in the vertical plane.
4. Determine if your opponent counters with a roll-off or a 180°
turn through the vertical plane in an effort to maneuver you out of his
six-o’clock position. If he employs the roll-off, simply roll with him and
maneuver toward his six-o’clock position. If he employs a 180° turn
through the vertical plane in an effort to gain separation, employ the
following procedures.
5. Initiate a barrel-roll (roll-away) as you begin to zoom past your
descending opponent. A roll-away will reduce your vector velocity in the
vertical plane; hence, provide your opponent less longitudinal separation.
6. Complete the barrel-roll (roll-away) and maneuver toward your
opponent’s six-o’clock position in the vertical plane. Your opponent
will now either repeat the pull-up and zoom or proceed to his second
alternative. If he repeats his previous maneuver, simply repeat your roll-off
and gain position for a missile or 20 mm cannon shot. If he employs the
second alternative, use the following procedures.
7. Do not press the attack in a curved plane intercepting the rim of
the defender’s turn. This will force you to either overshoot below your
opponent or to yo-yo out to the side in a nose-low attitude. In either case,
he will gain an advantage (see section on countering the overhead attack
with a negative delta Mach).
8. Spiral inside your opponent’s horizontal turn to match his turn and
to cut him off. This may be accomplished by adjusting your rate of spiral
and the slope of the spiral.

92

9. Continue the spiral, inside your opponent’s turn, until you start to
move below and inside his line of flight.
10. Roll wings-level, pull-up inside your opponent’s turn and zoom
toward his six-o’clock position. If you have excess airspeed or are not
spiraling well inside your opponent’s horizontal turn, you may be forced
to pull up and zoom outside his turning circle. In this case, employ the
following procedures.
11. Zoom outside your opponent’s horizontal turning circle – if you
are unable to complete your pull-up inside his horizontal turn radius –
then turn back toward him if he continues to turn or attempts to dive away.
12. Zoom to the outside and barrel-roll (roll away) toward your
opponent’s six-o’clock position, if he attempts a reversal to counter your
zoom to the outside.
The Vertical Rolling Scissors
The vertical rolling scissors is what the name implies – a defensive,
descending, rolling maneuver in the vertical plane. The purpose of this
maneuver is to gain an offensive advantage if an opponent overshoots a
defender’s flight path, and slides through his angular velocity cone while
descending in the vertical plane. See figure 31. The following situations
may be used to set the stage for employing the maneuver: (1) At high
altitude, when the defender has a high Mach with a low indicated airspeed.
In this case, the defender will be forced to perform a descending defensive
turn to maintain future maneuvering potential. If the attacker with a fair
rate of closure, thinks that his opponent is attempting to gain separation,
he may cut off in an effort to prevent him from doing so. With his higher
airspeed, his radius of turn during the cut-off will be greater than the
defender’s. As a result, he can be easily forced to overshoot the defender’s
descending flight path. (2)In a zoom-maneuver in which the attacker
is attempting to approach a zooming defender’s six-o’clock position.
The defender, observing the attacker’s position, uses the pull of gravity
and executes a 180° turn through the vertical plane in an effort to gain
separation and thus place the attack in an overhead attack with a negative
delta Mach. In an effort to prevent this, the attacker cuts off. During the
cut-off, his radius of turn is greater than the defender’s because of this
higher airspeed, and as a result, he overshoots the defender’s descending
flight path. (3) A six-o’clock missile attack, in which an attacker is
approaching his pull-up point for launch. The defender, observing the
attacker, may execute one of two maneuvers: An immediate defensive turn
down into the attack, or a pull-up and zoom followed by a 180° turn, in the
vertical plane, down into the zooming attacker (this is the same procedure
used as a counter to the low-speed yo-yo). In either of these cases, if the
attacker attempts a substantial cut-off he can be forced to overshoot his
opponent’s descending flight path.
93

Figure 31

94
VERTICAL ROLLING SCISSORS

With the stage set, we can now discuss the mechanics of the vertical
rolling scissors. Let’s assume that we have a defender zooming in the
vertical plane, with an attacker initiating a pull-up in an effort to maneuver
toward the zooming defender’s six-o’clock position. The defender,
observing his opponent’s position, turns 180° through the vertical plane,
down into the attack in an apparent attempt to gain separation. Observing
this maneuver, the attacker decides he can either cut off, or zoom and
turn 180° through the defender’s turning circle. Since he knows that a turn
through the defender’s turning circle will place him in an overhead attack
with a negative delta Mach, he elects to cut-off. Observing the cut-off, the
defender knows that the attacker will be performing his 180° turn through
the vertical plane at a higher airspeed. Therefore, the attacker’s turn
radius will be greater; hence, he will overshoot the defender’s descending
flight path. Understanding this, the defender reduces power to slow his
rate of descent (he may deceive the attacker in this power reduction by
momentarily lighting afterburner, then reducing power, to make it more
apparent that the defender is trying to dive for separation) then waits until
the attacker overshoots his flight path and is committed to a nose-low
attitude. At this instant, the defender comes in with back pressure and
reverse-rolls into the overshooting attacker. This will place the defender
below the attacker and 180° out of phase, with a less nose-low attitude;
hence, a lower vector velocity along the vertical axis. The attacker, noting
that he is out of phase, and is descending more rapidly than the defender,
will attempt to roll 180° toward the defender’s descending flight path.
Observing the attacker’s action, the defender rolls in the same direction.
This prevents the attacker from flying into his opponent’s six-o’clock
position. At the same time, it prevents him from reducing his nose-low
attitude. As a result, the attacker, with his higher vertical vector velocity,
has rolled 180° out of phase, down and below the defender. The defender
now has the advantage and he need only roll into the attacker’s six-o’clock
position.
To counter the vertical rolling scissors, a zooming attacker should
not attempt to cut off a descending defender when he has a substantial
airspeed advantage. Instead, he should roll away or barrel-roll to reduce
his ascending vertical vector velocity, hence his yo-yo apex. In an effort to
prevent the defender from gaining longitudinal separation, the attacker
need only initiate his roll-away as he starts to ascend past the diving
defender. This will allow him to complete his 180° change of direction with
less vertical displacement and will position him at the diving defender’s
six-o’clock position with less longitudinal separation and less negative rate
of closure. To maneuver for a launch or firing position, the attacker need
only maneuver against any forthcoming counters by the defender. If the
defender has none, the attacker moves in for the kill.

95

Procedures for the Vertical Rolling Scissors
1. Observe the attacker’s position. If he is in a six-o’clock-low position,
perform the following procedures.
2. Pull up and zoom in the vertical plane, or perform an immediate
descending defensive turn. If your opponent has not set up a zoom for a
launch or firing position, you may employ the pull-up and zoom. If he has,
immediately employ the descending defensive turn.
3. Turn 180° through the vertical plane, if you zoom, or continue the
dive if force to perform a descending defensive turn.
4. Observe your opponent to determine whether or not he will cut off.
If he cuts off, employ the following procedures.
5. Reduce power to slow rate of descent.
6. Reverse-roll, toward your opponent, when you observe his
overshoot and nose-low commitment. A reverse-roll should be
accomplished with back-pressure and rudder (high-angle-of-attack
maneuver) to reduce your nose-low attitude and your vertical vector
velocity.
7. Do not allow your opponent to roll toward your flight path – keep
him 180° out of phase. To accomplish this, roll in the same direction as
your opponent if he attempts to acquire your six-o’clock position.
8. Continue this rolling maneuver, with your opponent out of phase,
until he rolls down and below you. He will be forced into this position
because his vertical vector velocity is greater than your.
kill.

9. Roll into your opponent’s six-o’clock position and maneuver for the

Procedures for Countering the Vertical Rolling Scissors
1. Do not attempt to cut off as a zooming attacker against a
descending defender if you have a substantial airspeed advantage. Under
these conditions, a cut-off will force you to overshoot your opponent’s
descending flight path.
2. Roll away or barrel-roll as you move vertically past your descending
opponent. This maneuver will reduce your zooming vector velocity, hence
vertical displacement, in your zoom.
3. Continue the roll-away to acquire a 180° change of direction and a
six-o’clock-low position against your diving opponent. This prevents your
opponent from gaining a considerable longitudinal separation and at the
same time reduces your negative rate of closure.
96

4. Maneuver against any forthcoming counter thrown at you by your
opponent.
The High-G Barrel-Roll
There may come a time, in a tactical situation, in which you find
that you can nullify a missile attack, but have less success in countering
a follow-up 20 mm cannon attack. You will recall that a defender can
frustrate a missile attack by exceeding the missile’s lambda and/or
G-capabilities. The maneuvers needed to accomplish this are not too
demanding, providing the defender has visual contact with the attacker. On
the other hand, a much higher degree of skill – in respect to maneuvering
– is needed to counter an aggressive, skillfully-executed follow-up gun
attack. Under these circumstances even the most proficient defender may
find himself in a serious defensive position, with an attacker at six-o’clock
inside gun firing range. To get out of this situation, any defender knows
he must force the attacker to overshoot his flight path. In other words, he
must rotate his angular velocity cone in such a manner as to acquire lateral
separation. Turn and velocity, married to the pull of gravity, determine
his field of maneuver, and his ability to rotate his angular velocity cone.
He must employ these factors in proper perspective to gain an overshoot.
In this situation, this means that the defender must reduce his turn and
velocity more quickly than his opponent if he is to force his opponent out
of his six-o’clock position. From our previous discussions, it is obvious
that a barrel-roll type maneuver offers the best opportunity to quickly
change direction and reduce vector velocity. In this case, since the attacker
is at six-o’clock inside gun firing range, the defender must perform a
max-performance or a high-G barrel-roll to prevent his opponent from
matching his change of direction and reduction of vector velocity. Before
initiating the maneuver, his only remaining problem is to determine in
which direction the high-G barrel-roll should be executed. To answer this,
let’s assume that the defender is in a defensive turn with an attacker at sixo’clock under the conditions specified above.
In an attempt to force the attacker to overshoot, the defender can
either execute a barrel-roll over the top or a barrel-roll underneath out of
his defensive turn. If the attacker is at high speed – 300 knots or more in
the F-100 – and he performs a high-G barrel-roll underneath, the pull of
gravity will act in the same direction as his thrust vector. This means that
he will experience considerable difficulty in reducing his vector velocity
more quickly than his opponent. On the other hand, if he performs
a high-G barrel-roll over the top, his thrust vector acts in a direction
opposite the pull of gravity. This means that he will reduce his vector
velocity much more rapidly in respect to his opponent. To illustrate both
situations: If the defender rolls underneath, he must execute the maneuver
first, since the attack is maneuvering in respect to him. This means that the
pull of gravity will act in the same direction as the defender’s thrust
97

and velocity, before it acts on the attacker. As a result, the defender will
experience difficulty in reducing his vector velocity more rapidly than his
opponent. On the other hand, if the defender rolls over the top, once again
he must execute the maneuver first, since the attacker is maneuvering in
respect to him. In this case, the defender can reduce his vector velocity
more rapidly than his opponent since the pull of gravity acts against his
thrust and velocity, before it acts against the attacker’s thrust and velocity.
It is obvious from this discussion that if a defender, at high speed in a
defensive turn, has an attacker at six-o’clock inside gun firing range, he
should execute the high-G barrel-roll over the top, rather than underneath,
in order to gain an overshoot.
If a defender does not have the necessary speed to execute the high-G
roll over the top, he should not attempt to do so, because the high angle of
attack required to successfully accomplish the maneuver and the pull of
gravity will cause his speed to decay very rapidly. If the defender attempts
to roll over the top, this means that he will stall out and be unable to
complete the maneuver, and the attacker will set up a six-o’clock position
for an easy kill. To prevent this, the defender with insufficient speed to
execute a roll over the top, should perform a high-G roll underneath
(in the F-100, this maneuver should be initiated with an airspeed of 250
knots or less). In this situation, a defender needs the pull of gravity to
successfully complete the maneuver. He will be maneuvering with a high
angle of attack. The induced drag generated by this angle of attack will
provide a deceleration greater than the acceleration generated by the pull
of gravity. Hence, if the defender executes a high-G roll underneath, he can
still change direction and reduce velocity more rapidly than his opponent.
Why? Because the attacker must still maneuver in respect to the defender.
The attacker’s rate of turn and vector velocity are dependent upon his
angle of attack, which, in turn, is dependent upon his rate of turn, which is
dependent upon the defender’s velocity, angle-off and range.
Vt × Sin θ
Range
Now that we understand the need for the high-G barrel-roll – both
over the top and underneath – and when it should be employed, let’s
discuss the mechanics of each maneuver.
W=

The High-G Barrel-Roll over the Top
As indicated above, the high-G barrel-roll over the top is designed
for use against an attacker at six-o’clock inside gun firing range, when the
defender is in a defensive turn and is unable to shake the attacker. More
specifically, the attacker should be in fairly close – a range of around 1500
feet or less. If the attacker is at a range much greater than this, the high-G
barrel-roll, because of its rapid reduction of the defender’s velocity, will
only serve to bring him closer toward the defender’s six-o’clock position.
In other words, this maneuver should not be employed at the longer gun
firing ranges or as a defense
98

against a missile attack. If so, the attacker will simply play the maneuver
to reduce longitudinal separation to move into position for a kill. The
defender will be in a poor position to counter, since he will have killed all
his maneuvering velocity.
With these conditions in mind, the moment the defender realizes
he is unable to shake his opponent, he should start to execute the roll
(see figure 32). He should not delay, otherwise the attacker may make the
kill. To execute the maneuver properly, a defender should maintain backpressure and start his roll over the top without releasing any G. This means
that he must exercise proper rudder and aileron control; otherwise adverse
yaw will prevent him from performing the maneuver (some aileron may
be required during the start of the roll, however, as the roll progresses,
his angle of attack increases and more rudder will be needed). As the
defender comes through the inverted position, he should maintain backpressure and increase his roll rate. If he fails to maintain back-pressure,
he will not reduce vector velocity rapidly enough, and will not force his
opponent around the outside of the roll. If he fails to increase his roll-rate,
he will not successfully complete it, since rapid airspeed decay is reducing
his maneuvering potential. As the defender reaches the 270° point – the
opposite side of the roll – he should play top rudder to prevent dish-out,
and visually ascertain the attacker’s position. If, in an effort to secure a kill,
the attacker has followed the defender around the roll, he will be forced
outside the defender’s roll. This means that at the 270° point he will be
high, toward the rear and outside the roll (if the attacker has not reduced
very much of his velocity during the roll, he will simply be high and to the
outside). If, while the attacker is in this position the defender continues
his roll-out – holding top rudder to maintain a nose-high attitude – it
forces the attacker to slide below and forward in an obvious overshoot. The
defender then simply increases his nose-up attitude and rolls or S’s toward
the attacker’s six-o’clock position.
To counter the high-G roll the attacker may attempt to yo-yo out the
top of the roll or reverse-roll out of the top in an effort to secure a sixo’clock position. If the attacker yo-yos out the top the intent is obvious – he
is attempting to reduce his vector velocity along the axis of the roll by yoyoing in the vertical plane. In this way he can maintain a six-o’clock-high
position after the defender completes the roll. If the attacker reverse-rolls,
he will roll through a wider arc in the opposite direction. If he maintains
back pressure while doing this, he can reduce vector velocity along the
axis of the defender’s roll more rapidly than the defender. As a result, upon
completion of the roll by the defender, the attacker will be at six-o’clock.
To maneuver against either of these counters, the defender must ascertain
the attacker’s position as he approaches the 270° point in his roll. He will
be unable to determine the attacker’s position prior to this, since the yo-yo
out, or the reverse-roll, places the

99

Figure 32

100
HIGH-G BARREL-ROLL

attacker in the defender’s blind spot – toward the underside of his aircraft.
At the 270° point, if the defender notes the attacker’s position as being
toward the rear, at the top of his canopy (by “top of the canopy”, we mean
that the attacker will be in the horizontal plane when the defender is at
the 270° point of his roll) the attacker has performed a reverse roll. If
the attacker is in this position, the defender does not complete the roll.
Instead, he performs a horizontal turn into the attacker and forces him to
overshoot, and dives for separation to gain airspeed and place the attacker
in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach (the defender does not
attempt a scissors, since he does not have the airspeed after performing the
high-G roll). At the 270° point, if the defender observes the attacker to be
high and to the rear (off the left side of the canopy in a high-G roll to the
left, and off the right side of the canopy in a high-G roll to the right by the
defender). The defender turns 180° through the vertical plane, under the
attacker, relaxes G and dives for separation. To follow, the attacker must
run out of his nose-high yo-yo toward the diving defender’s six-o’clock
position. This allows the defender to gain lateral separation and places the
attacker in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach.
The High-G Roll Underneath
In discussing the high-G roll underneath, let’s assume that we have a
defender in a defensive turn with an attacker at six-o’clock inside gun firing
range. If the defender does not have the necessary airspeed to execute a
high-G roll over the top, he will be committed to a high-G roll underneath.
In the F-100, this means that if the defender’s airspeed has dropped below
300 knots, he should not attempt the high-G roll over the top. However,
before executing the roll underneath, he should maintain G, and allow his
speed to dissipate to 250 knots or less. With these conditions prevailing,
the defender should immediately start the high-G roll underneath in
an effort to shake his attacker. He should not delay, otherwise he will
experience considerable speed decay, and will encounter considerable
difficulty in executing the maneuver. To execute the roll underneath, the
defender maintains back pressure, employs rudder in the direction of
the roll – bottom rudder – all the way around the roll. If done properly,
the maneuver will describe a barrel-roll underneath. To the attacker, just
after the maneuver has started, it will appear as a split-S. This illusion is
created by the high angle of attack generated in performing the maneuver
(this deception will cause the attacker to cut off in an effort to counter
his opponents apparent dive for separation. The cut-off will place the
attacker in a steep nose-down attitude). As the defender rolls past the
inverted, near-vertical position, to the completion of the maneuver – a
wings-level and near-nose-level attitude – the attacker will overshoot below
the defender’s line of flight at a high relative airspeed. See figure 33. The
attacker is forced into this overshoot because his steep nose-down attitude
combined with his rate

101

Figure 33

102
VECTOR ROLL (UNDERNEATH)

of roll and/or turn – which is dependent upon the defender’s rate of roll
and turn – forces him below his opponent with a higher vector velocity
along the axis of the high-G roll. As a result, upon completion of the
maneuver, the defender will be above and somewhat toward the rear of his
opponent. To gain a firing position, the defender need only roll off or “S”
down to the attacker’s six-o’clock position.
To counter the high-G roll underneath, it is obvious that the attacker
must not generate a steep nose-low attitude, then attempt to follow the
maneuver. In other words, he must not interpret the roll underneath as an
apparent dive for separation. To determine whether the maneuver is a roll
underneath or a dive for separation, the attacker need only observe the
dynamics of the defender’s initial move down and out of the defensive turn.
If the defender appears to fly through his longitudinal axis, he is in a dive
for separation. If he appears to pivot or rotate around his longitudinal axis,
he is performing the high-G roll underneath. The attacker must observe
the defender very carefully to catch this difference. If he does, and notes
that the defender is rotating around his longitudinal axis, he should not cut
off. Instead, he can pull up, delay momentarily, then follow the defender
around the roll. This will provide the attacker the opportunity to play the
maneuver, hence prevent an overshoot below the defender. As a second
alternative, the attacker can pull off and roll in the opposite direction. By
doing this, he is not dependent upon a G and rate of roll governed by the
defender’s velocity, angle-off and range. Instead, the attacker can pull the
G necessary to play his rate of roll to reduce vector velocity and prevent
an overshoot below the defender. If done properly, the reverse-roll will
place the attacker at the defender’s six-o’clock position. At completion of
the defender’s roll underneath the defender can move against either one of
these counters, by observing the attacker’s actions. If the attacker pulls off
to initiate either counter, the defender does not complete the maneuver.
Instead, he relaxes G and dives for separation. If the attacker is pulling
off and up in either case, this will place him in an overhead attack with a
negative delta Mach. However, the separation gained in this situation is
not as great as in the other over-head attacks with a negative delta Mach.
Therefore, a great deal more pressure is exerted on the defender, unless he
can deceive the attacker into following his high-G barrel-roll underneath.
On the other hand, the high-G roll underneath has an advantage over the
high-G roll over the top because the defender can observe the attacker
throughout most of the maneuver, whereas in a roll over the top, he
cannot. This means that if the attacker counters with a roll underneath, the
defender can take immediate action, whereas in a roll over the top, he is
forced to the 270° point before he can observe the attacker’s counter.
Procedures for the High-G Barrel-Roll over the Top
1. Perform a defensive turn in an effort to force your attacker to
overshoot. If he does not, and is within gun firing range at six o’clock (out
1500 feet or less) use the following procedures.
103

2. Barrel-roll over the top without relaxing any G forces. This requires
extreme rudder control and very little aileron movement (see section
describing adverse yaw). This maneuver will give you a rapid reduction in
vector velocity and will provide a deceleration advantage because your line
of flight will describe an arc above the horizon, prior to your opponent’s.
Your opponent will be force to barrel-roll around the outside of your roll.
Remember, you must have the necessary airspeed (300 knots or more in
the F-100) before starting the maneuver.
3. Observe your opponent’s position. When coming through the 270°
point or down the opposite side of the roll, keep “coming in” with top
rudder and get him committed into a nose-low attitude.
4. Continue rolling and keep adding top rudder to increase your noseup attitude. This will force your opponent to slide below and in front of
you.
5. Continue maneuvering to gain the advantage as your opponent
slides below and forward. Either roll off or “S” down into his six-o’clock
position.
6. Try to keep your opponent in sight throughout the maneuver. Be
sure you have him in sight as you reach the 270° point. If he is at the top of
your canopy, and to the rear, maneuver as outline below.
7. Discontinue your roll-out at the 270° point and turn through the
horizontal plane into the attack. Your opponent, having accomplished a
reverse roll-off, will be at an angle-off, in the horizontal plane, when you
are at the 270° point. To counter the reverse roll-off, you must turn into the
attack at his point.
8. Force your opponent into an overshoot in the horizontal plane then
relax G, light afterburner and dive for separation. If the attacker attempts to
turn in behind you, he will be placed in an overhead attack with a negative
delta Mach. Do not attempt a scissors maneuver after your opponent
overshoots. You will not have enough maneuvering airspeed to successfully
employ it.
9. If your opponent is nose-high in a yo-yo maneuver (with nose-tail
separation) at the 270° point, turn 180° through the vertical plane, relax G,
light afterburner and dive for separation. If the attacker attempts to follow,
he will be placed in an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach.
10. At the 270° point, continue your roll if your opponent does not
yo-yo out into an extreme nose-high attitude. Since he has failed to zoom
sufficiently in the vertical plane, his vector velocity, along the axis of the
roll, will be greater than yours. This will force him forward and will place
you to the rear and below him.

104

11. Maneuver (low-speed yo-yo) for a firing position
Procedures for the High-G Roll Underneath
1. Perform a defensive turn, in an effort to force your attacker into
an overshoot. If you are unable to do so, and you are within the speed
requirement for the high-G roll underneath (250 knots or less in the F-100)
employ the following procedures.
2. Roll underneath without releasing any G force. This will prevent
any subsequent increase in airspeed and will tend to deceive your
opponent into thinking you are attempting a dive for separation.
3. Hold rudder in the direction of the roll all the way around the roll
and play power to deceive your opponent. By holding rudder, you will
successfully perform the high-G roll underneath without falling out into
a steep nose-low spiral and a subsequent easy tracking solution. If your
opponent was deceived into cutting off, he will be forced below you in an
obvious overshoot. If this occurs, maneuver as outline below.
4. Complete the roll to a wings-level, nose-level attitude. The attacker
will be in a nose-low attitude below your line of flight with a higher vector
velocity.
5. Bring your aircraft to a nose-high attitude, then roll off toward the
attacker’s six-o’clock position.
6. If the attacker is not deceived into cutting off and following you,
after you initiate the roll, employ the following procedures.
7. Discontinue the roll, relax G, light afterburner and dive for
separation, when you observe your opponent pulling up to delay, or to
reverse-roll. This will place the attacker in an overhead attack with a
negative delta Mach. However, separation will not be great, therefore
prepare to counter any subsequent action.
Maneuvering from a Nose-Quarter Attack
Until now, our interest has been directed to the offensive and
defensive tactics involved in rear-hemisphere attacks. Now we will concern
ourselves with forward-hemisphere attacks. From experience, we know
many fighter-versus-fighter engagements start with the opposing fighters
approaching each other’s nose-quarter position. Since this is the case, it
behooves us, as fighter pilots, to understand the tactics needed to gain an
advantage from this position. Hence, the remainder of our discussion, in
fighter maneuvers, will be concerned with the nose-quarter attack. This
will complete the maneuvering aspect of fighter-versus-fighter combat and
will prepare us for
105

the other elements of fighter-versus-fighter operations – Tactical
Formation and Flight Tactics.
To understand how we must gain an advantage from a nose-quarter
attack, let’s refer back to our concept of turn and velocity. As previously
stated there are only two basic things that an attacker or a defender
can do in order to gain an advantage – change direction (turn) and/or
velocity. Applying these principles in a nose-quarter attack, we know that
a given attacker must maneuver into the angular velocity cone in the rear
hemisphere of his opponent to successfully launch a missile or deliver an
effective 20mm cannon burst. This means that in a nose-quarter attack,
an attacker will need a substantial rate of turn, a small turn radius and a
closing velocity to gain his opponent’s six-o’clock position. If the attacker
fails to maneuver so that he acquires all three of these factors, he may never
gain an advantage. Worse yet, he may provide his opponent an advantage.
With this in mind, let’s assume that an attacker notes that he is approaching
an opponent from a nose-quarter position. The moment the attacker
visually acquires his target, he should dive and light afterburner to gain an
airspeed advantage. The distance he dives will depend upon the aircraft’s
acceleration and zoom capabilities (in the F-100, he can dive from 5000 to
10,000 feet below his target). The airspeed gained from this maneuver will
provide the attacker a greater forthcoming zoom than if he had maintained
straight-and-level flight. The zoom will provide him freedom of maneuver
in the vertical plane, so that he may effectively use the pull of gravity to
increase his rate of turn and reduce his turn radius along the horizontal
axis. Another advantage acquired by this dive maneuver is the element
of surprise. The dive frames his opponent against blue sky and frames
the attacker against the ground (assuming that the opponent does not
counter with a like maneuver). From experience, we know it is generally
more difficult to maintain visual contact with an adversary framed against
the ground. In view of this, the opponent may fail to maintain visual
contact (especially at long range before the dive maneuver is executed).
The possible lack of visual contact enables the attacker to set up the next
stage of his maneuver – a turn for an offset in the horizontal plane. If the
defender fails to maintain visual contact, the attacker will easily generate
this offset. To the attacker this is the first indication of whether or not the
defender actually has contact (if not the defender will fail to turn, therefore
fail to prevent the attacker from achieving his offset point). Assuming
that the defender fails to counter, this places the attacker below and off
to one side of his opponent, on an anti-parallel course. The attacker, with
an airspeed advantage, is now in position to execute a turn through the
vertical and horizontal plane toward the rear hemisphere of his opponent.
Since the attacker is below his opponent he may start the maneuver before
the defender reaches his line-abreast position. See figure 34. The attacker
will then execute a chandelle type maneuver (high speed yo-yo) toward his
opponent. The chandelle

106

Figure 34

107

INITIAL MANEUVER FOR NOSE QUARTER ATTACK

diminishes airspeed and reduces horizontal turn radius. This will prevent
an overshoot, however, it will reduce his rate of turn and diminish his
closing velocity, as he approaches the defender’s rear hemisphere. To
prevent the defender from achieving considerable longitudinal separation,
and to increase the attacker’s turn rate toward the defender’s six-o’clock
position, the attacker should turn down through the vertical plane (lowspeed yo-yo) toward the defender’s six-o’clock-low position. See figure 35.
The turn down through the vertical plane enables the attacker to effectively
use the pull of gravity in achieving an increase in airspeed and turn rate
and a decrease in turn radius. If the defender fails to counter, the attacker
need only drive in underneath him, and set up for a missile attack. If the
defender counters with a turn or pull-up, after the attacker has initiated
his chandelle from his offset point, the attacker still has the advantage. He
need only shallow out his chandelle and zoom more through the vertical
plane. This will enable him to play his opponent’s counter and diminish his
horizontal turn radius. However, once again, this will decrease his airspeed,
hence decrease his turn rate as long as he remains in the zoom. Therefore,
to gain airspeed and a more rapid change of direction (turn rate) than
his opponent, he should use the pull of gravity to turn down through the
vertical plane into a low-speed yo-yo below his opponent’s line of flight.
This will place him inside his opponent’s turn at a reduced angle-off with
a higher airspeed. To further reduce angle-off and longitudinal separation,
the attacker need only repeat the zoom and dive below his opponent’s
line of flight, or zoom and perform the barrel-roll attack (a roll-away
maneuver) toward his opponent’s six-o’clock-low position. Even if the
defender countered in like manner, after the attacker started to zoom from
below and out to the side, the attacker would eventually gain the advantage,
since his initial dive for airspeed and his offset give him a maneuvering
advantage. The dive for airspeed provides an airspeed and rate of turn
advantage. The offset below provides an initial maneuvering advantage.
To effectively counter a nose-quarter attack of this nature, the
defender must decide whether he is trying to avoid a fight or to gain a kill.
In either case when the attacker starts to dive for airspeed and a possible
offset, the defender should counter in like manner. This will prevent the
attacker from gaining an airspeed advantage. It will also prevent him
from attempting an offset, since such a maneuver under these conditions
would be the same as reducing the defender’s angle-off. This will provide
the defender some advantage. Now if the attacker approaches and starts
to move past the defender, he must decide if he is trying to avoid a fight
or not. If he is attempting to avoid a fight, he should push over and dive
for separation, as the attacker attempts to zoom, turn and dive for a sixo’clock position. This maneuver by the defender will place the attacker in
an overhead attack with a negative delta Mach, with extreme longitudinal
separation. The attacker will be unable to close for a missile attack. On the
other hand, if the defender decides to stay and fight, he should

108

Figure 35

109
NOSE QUARTER ATTACK

zoom and dive in the manner just discussed in an effort to gain an
advantage. If the attacker is as skillful as the defender in employing this
technique, this might not be a wise decision.
If the defender desires to counter an attacker who has already offset
below and to the side, for his forthcoming zoom and dive, the defender
should turn toward the offset and dive for separation. Since the attacker
must perform a 180° change of direction, this will place him in an overhead
attack with a negative delta Mach, with extreme longitudinal separation. If
the defender attempts to stay and fight, instead of diving for separation, the
attacker will eventually gain the advantage because of his higher airspeed
and better position (in this situation, we assume that the attacker will
employ the proper zoom and dive techniques to gain an advantage).
Procedures for the Nose-Quarter Attack
1. Light afterburner and dive immediately below your opponent to
gain energy for your forthcoming zoom and maneuverability in the vertical
plane. A dive below will also provide you the element of surprise needed
for your next move.
2. Turn to offset point in the horizontal plane. This will place you
below and out to the side of your opponent on an anti-parallel course. If
your opponent fails to counter, you will have a maneuvering advantage in
terms of position as well as airspeed. In this event employ the following
procedures.
3. Start a chandelle toward your opponent, so that you will be near the
90° point of the chandelle when you are approximately 90° angle-off from
your opponent. This maneuver will reduce your turn radius and decrease
your airspeed.
4. Turn through the vertical plane out of the chandelle, inside and
below your opponent’s line of flight, toward his six-o’clock-low position.
A turn through the vertical plane enables you to gain your opponent’s
six-o’clock-low position without extreme longitudinal separation and a
possible flight path overshoot in the horizontal plane, since you increase
your airspeed and turn rate, and at the same time, further reduce your turn
radius. To gain maximum effect, a turn through the vertical plane should
be initiated as you pass the 90° point of your chandelle.
5. Accelerate below your opponent for an AIM-9B attack from sixo’clock-low. If your opponent counters with a defensive turn or a pull-up
against your dive toward a six-o’clock-low position, employ the following
procedures.
6. Pull up and zoom from your inside-low position and repeat the
zoom-dive technique to gain an advantage, or barrel-roll (roll-away)
110

out of the zoom toward your opponent’s six-o’clock-low position.
Generally, the roll-away will enable you to gain your opponent’s six-o’clocklow position more quickly. However, the zoom-dive technique may be
more appropriate if you horizontally overshoot your opponent’s flight path
on the zoom, and he dives for separation after the overshoot.
Procedures for Countering the Nose-Quarter Attack
1. Dive the instant your opponent dives, to prevent him from gaining
an airspeed and a possible offset advantage.
2. Do not allow your opponent to offset. If he attempts to do so, turn
toward the direction of the offset. This will reduce your angle-off toward
his six-o’clock position, and will give you a slight advantage if he offsets
(under these circumstances, he most likely will not attempt it).
3. Decide whether you will avoid a fighter-versus-fighter engagement
or stay and fight. If you wish to avoid the engagement, simply push
over and dive for separation as your opponent moves past you on an
anti-parallel course. Since your opponent must perform a 180° change
of direction, this will provide you extreme longitudinal separation
outside missile range. If you wish to stay and fight, employ the following
procedures.
4. Pull up and zoom, in the vertical plane, toward your opponent – as
your opponent starts to move past your line-abreast position on an antiparallel course – to reduce your horizontal turn radius. While in the zoom,
your airspeed and turn rate will decrease. Therefore, to acquire a rapid
change of direction and to accelerate toward your opponent’s six-o’clock
position, employ the procedures outlined in the following paragraph.
5. Dive out of your zoom, below your opponent’s line of flight, in an
attempt to gain a six-o’clock-low position. If your opponent fails to emulate
your zoom-dive technique, you will gain an advantage by reducing angleoff and moving toward is six-o’clock position. From this position, you
need only repeat the process or employ the barrel-roll attack to move in
for the kill. If your opponent emulates your zoom-dive technique, you will
be stalemated. If this is the situation, you must use your own judgment
to determine whether you should continue to fight or break off the
engagement.

111

CHAPTER III
TACTICAL FORMATION
In air-to-air combat, the primary purpose of tactical formation is
two-fold: (1) To provide security against attacks by enemy fighters, and (2)
To conduct offensive operations against enemy bombers and/or fighters.
To gain security, any formation must be able to detect the attack and
maneuver against it before the attackers achieve a lethal position. This
means that the formation must be so constructed that attacking fighters
with air-to-air missiles can be detected before they are within launch
range. At the same time, this formation must possess characteristics of
maneuverability and mutual support so that it can counter the attack
as well as see it. These same characteristics are necessary in conducting
offensive air-to-air operations.
To gain maximum lookout security against a rear-hemisphere
attack, the flight must be so constructed that visual cross-cover is the
maximum attainable. Two means by which a formation can increase its
visual cross-cover are: (1) Increase the number of aircraft within the basic
maneuvering formation, and (2) Place these aircraft line-abreast at definite
intervals to increase the field of cross-cover. By increasing the number of
aircraft, we provide more flight members covering the rear hemisphere.
If we stack the flight line-abreast, we provide greater across-cover, thus
increasing the probability of detection a rear-hemisphere attack. This
means that we increase look-out security but at the same time we decrease
maneuverability. To maximize maneuverability, a flight must consist of
as few members as possible (a single aircraft is more maneuverable than
any formation consisting of more than one aircraft) with these members
stack in-trail. From experience we know that when the number within the
flight is reduced, it becomes easier for the members to keep track of and
avoid one another during any maneuvering engagement. Experience also
indicates it is much easier to maneuver in-trail as opposed to line-abreast
formation.
In order to acquire security and maneuverability, we must
compromise between maximum look-out security and maximum
maneuverability. The extent of the compromise needed will determine the
type formation flown in a fighter-versus-fighter engagement. The increase
range of AIM-9B, as opposed to the 20mm cannon, forces us to construct
a formation in which the compromise favors look-out security. This means
that the formation will be flown very nearly line-abreast at a specified
interval to pick up a missile attack at ranges of greater than 15,000 feet. To
maintain maneuverability and mutual support, the size of the formation
must be restricted to no more than four aircraft. If a number greater than
four is employed, maneuverability and mutual support become difficult
and complicated. On the other hand, if less than two aircraft are employed,
the look-out capability is reduced and mutual support becomes impossible.
Therefore, to provide look-out
112

security and maneuverability, a formation of two, three or four aircraft
must be employed.
The three-ship flight, with a leader and two wingmen, has been
evaluated many times throughout the history of fighter aviation. In spite
of many attempts to propose a three-ship flight as a combat formation, it
has never been extensively employed. The reason is that a tree-ship flight,
with flanking wingmen, provides excellent look-out capability in the rear
hemisphere on a combat air patrol; however, when this formation detects
an attack and maneuvers against it, the result has always been the same
– chaos. The wingmen cannot keep track of and avoid one another while
maneuvering in respect to their leader and their attackers. As a result,
one or the other of the wingmen is forced out of the formation and flight
integrity is broken. The attackers simply drive in and take the single, then
maneuver after the element after having destroyed the single or having
forced him out of the fight. On the attack, where hard combat maneuvering
is necessary, flight integrity disappears just as it did when maneuvering on
the defensive.
As indicated previously, the two-ship formation would be more
maneuverable than any other type we may employ. Our problem in using
this type formation is to provide extensive look-out security in order to
detect a possible missile attack. If we stack the formation line-abreast, we
must provide sufficient interval so the element can detect a missile attack
at ranges greater than 15,000 feet. In order that this may be accomplished,
the flight must spread about 2500 feed apart. A disadvantage of a spread
of this magnitude is quickly apparent. Initial maneuverability is reduced
after detecting the attack in the rear hemisphere. When the missile’s
limitation is known, this maneuverability disadvantage is not as great as
it appears (remember, to defend against a missile attack at long range,
we need angular velocity plus airspeed, not a small turn radius and a low
airspeed). This means that maneuverability is not required to the same
extent as in gun tactics. With this in mind, we can safely accept an initial
maneuverability restriction; however, the real disadvantage of the two-ship
flight concerns look-out security. With only two ships, the leader of this
formation must spend a great deal of time looking to the rear, rather than
looking for enemy targets. In terms of look-out capability, this means a
loss in offensive potential. If this loss can be accepted, along with reduced
initial maneuverability, the two-ship flight may be employed as a basic
maneuvering formation.
To employ the element correctly, without sacrificing maneuverability
beyond initial maneuverability, the wingman must know how to position
himself during all maneuvers. On patrol, prior to initial contact, the
wingman will maintain the position specified above – line-abreast and
about 2500 feet out. During turns, the wingman will play the outside as
well as the inside of the turn, in order to maintain position.

113

This will not be too difficult because the maneuvers executed, prior
to contact, will not be of the maximum-performance variety. To allow the
wingman to easily maintain his position and to provide adequate rearward
coverage, the wingman must maneuver through both the horizontal and
vertical planes. If the leader performs a turn away from the wingman, the
wingman lowers his nose and cuts to the inside. This procedure allows the
wingman to reduce his horizontal turning component and, at the same
time, provides him a rate of closure so he will not be straggling behind his
leader. As the wingman moves inside and low toward the leader’s lineabreast position, he should play his crossover so that he does not cross
in front of his leader. He should cross to the outside, slide high and fly in
the plane of the leader. If this crossover technique is employed during all
turns, the wingman will describe a circular movement in the plane of the
leader’s aircraft, see figure 36. On the outside of this circle the wingman
will lose airspeed and slide to the rear. On the inside, the wingman will
gain airspeed and move forward. In effect, the wingman is employing the
low-speed and the high-speed yo-yo as a means of maintaining position,
and providing sufficient visual cross-coverage. At the same time, this
maneuver will enable the leader to cover his wingman, whether he be on
the outside or on the inside of the turn. If the initial turn by the leader is
toward the wingman, the wingman will be unable to cross over behind and
underneath his leader. In this situation, the wingman must pull up, play
the leader’s turn and cross to the outside, above and behind the plane of
the leader’s aircraft. After the initial crossover, the wingman employs the
techniques specified above for the remainder of his crossovers.
When maneuvers approach maximum performance, the wingman
will be unable to maintain the loose position implied in patrol formation.
He will be forced into a fighting position, in a narrow cone, behind the
leader’s aircraft. In order to remain with the leader and, at the same time,
provide rearward coverage he will be forced to assume a position closer
to the tail of the leader’s aircraft. As we define it, the fighting position is
any place within a 60° cone with the wingman approximately 1000 feet
behind the leader. To maintain position in this cone, the wingman employs
the same maneuvering techniques which he used in patrol formation.
(He maneuvers through both the vertical and horizontal planes). During
max maneuvers, if the wingman attempts to maneuver very much outside
the confines of this cone, he will find it difficult to maintain position and
also provide rearward visual coverage. The primary duty of the wingman
while in fighting position is to provide visual coverage to the rear, while
the leader is concentrating on maneuvering for an advantage. This is of
extreme importance if the enemy is equipped with air-to-air missiles.
Considering all factors, a two-ship is better than a three-ship formation.
Although a two-ship element has an initial look-out disadvantage, while in
patrol formation, it has a distinct maneuvering advantage, and a somewhat
better look-out advantage while fighting as a basic formation.

114

Figure 36

115

MANEUVERING IN THE FIGHTING POSITION

When employed properly, the four-ship flight will give us all-around
advantages in look-out, maneuverability and mutual support. To acquire
these advantages without sacrificing one for the other, a flight of four
must consist of two mutually-supporting elements. When on patrol, the
elements should fly line-abreast from five to seven thousand feet apart.
The wingman should maintain a position from line-abreast to no more
than 20° back, at approximately 1500 feed out from the respective element
leaders. A formation spread in this manner provides excellent look-out
capability, because the wingmen can provide mutual crossover at ranges
in excess of 15,000 feet. Maneuverability in this formation is somewhat
restricted, When the lead element turns away from the second element,
the second element will experience considerable difficulty in regaining a
line-abreast position, unless the turn is held for almost 180°. If the lead
element turns into the second elements, the second element will be forced
to pull up and cross above the lead element. If this is not done, the second
element will be forced to cross in front of the lead. In either case, if the turn
is less than 90°, the second element will experience considerable difficulty
in regaining a line-abreast position. To provide more maneuverability and
flexibility, the second element must be given a greater field of maneuver.
This field of maneuver should enable the second element to easily position
itself, no matter what type of turn is performed by the lead element. A
method of providing this freedom of maneuver is to spread the second
element in both the vertical and horizontal planes. When this is done, if the
lead element turns away, the second element can lower its nose, cut across
the inside and quickly reposition itself, even though the lead element does
not perform 90° or 180° turns. On turns into the second element, the
second element can maneuver well above the lead element without fear of
dragging the wingman through one another (remember wingmen will be
maneuvering through both the vertical and horizontal planes to maintain
position not their respective leaders). The freedom of maneuver provided
the second element leader enables him to devote less time to flying
formation and more time to looking for prospective kills. At the same time,
during turns, it allows the wingman to provide better rearward coverage,
because the elements will not be strung out in extended-train. The only
real objection to this formation is that, in straight-away flight, the second
element must look through a greater distance to detect a missile attack
against the lead element. Although this is true, it can be mathematically
demonstrated that the additional distance through which both elements
must look, is insignificant: (Less than 300’ against a six-o’clock attacker
if the fluid element is stacked vertically less than 3000’ above the lead
element). If the attack is directed from six-o’clock-low, the additional
distance through which the second element must look is somewhat greater.
However, the attackers must get in considerably closer along the horizontal
plane before initiating a pull-up into an underside attack. This means that
the second element will be afforded more of a plane view of the attackers,
thus a large target in perspective even though the additional distance is
somewhat greater. Another reason cited for not
116

using the high element is the fact that the aircraft wing covers a
considerable portion of the highly vulnerable six-o’clock-low attack area.
This is true for both the high element and the level-stacked element. To
surmount this difficulty, wingmen simply dip their wings occasionally to
enable them to cover the vulnerable rear area.
In view of the maneuverability advantage offered by the fluid-four
type formation (the formation in which the second element is stacked both
horizontally and vertically) without significant look-out disadvantage,
we consider it the best combat patrol formation. In fluid-four, the second
or fluid element should be line-abreast, 5,000 to 7,000 feet out, and
approximately 2,000 feet above the lead element. As in a normal tactical
formation, the wingman will maintain a position from line-abreast to 20°
back and 1500 feet out to the side opposite the other element see figure 37.
As indicated in the two-ship flight, the wingman will fly the vertical as well
as the horizontal plane in order to maintain their respective positions. On
patrol, the fluid element leader will maintain position on the lead element
by flying through the vertical and horizontal plane during all turns and
maneuvers. For a fighting position, the fluid element must operate as
an independent unit during violent maneuvers in fighter-versus fighter
engagements (the reason for this will become apparent when we discuss
flight tactics).
If the tactical situation indicates that not enough aircraft are available
for area saturation with four-ship flights do not employ the fluid-four
formation. Instead, use individual elements as basic patrol formations and
as basic fighting formations. Although not as decisive as the four-ship
flight in terms of look-out capability, maneuverability and mutual support,
the two-ship flight will be much more effective than the three-ship flight.
The only real advantage which a flight of four has over an element is initial
look-out capability and initial mutual support. After the engagement is
entered, the fluid-four, or the four-ship flight will become nothing more
than individual fighting elements. If suitable tail-warning radar devices
were available, four-ship flights would enjoy very little advantage over
individual fighting elements in terms of combat capability. The dictum,
“economy of force” would most certainly prevail. Tactical formation in
fighter-versus-fighter engagements would probably be dominated by the
element or even possibly the single ship. Without this needed radar gear, a
four-ship flight is the best all-around tactical formation.
Three factors to consider when employing either the fluid-four or the
element in combat or on a combat patrol are: (1) look-out capability, (2)
maneuverability, and (3) fuel management. In the era of missile-equipped
supersonic fighters with afterburner, these factors determine the best
altitude for patrol in order to enter a given flight-versus-flight engagement.
If the patrol is conducted at extreme altitudes (40,000 feet or above) the
look-out problem becomes a liability which increases as altitude increases.
The advantage of
117

Figure 37

118
FLUID FOUR FORMATION

firing an air-to-air missile at greater range against a given defender
is nullified by the possibility of an enemy attacker enjoying the same
advantage. In addition, extreme altitude provides a maneuverability
disadvantage in terms of indicated maneuvering airspeed. At extreme
altitude, fuel management may be an advantage in some aircraft while in
others (F-100) it can be a disadvantage. If the patrol is conducted at very
low altitudes (10,000 feet or below) the look-out problem is considerably
reduced and maneuverability, in terms of maneuvering airspeed, is
certainly increased. However, this maneuverability is nullified somewhat
by the fact that maneuvering becomes more restricted to the horizontal
plane as opposed to the vertical plane. At very low altitudes, good fuel
management is not possible with present-day jet engines and afterburners.
The optimum altitudes, considering all three factors – look-out capability,
maneuverability and fuel management – for patrolling and entering
a fighter-versus-fighter engagement are the middle altitudes between
25,000 and 35,000 feet (even this is open for argument if one considers the
possibility of surface-to-air missiles). The exact altitudes will depend upon
look-out capability and maneuverability of the fighters employed. In the
F-100, the best all-around altitude seems to be approximately 30,000 feet.
At this altitude, maneuverability and fuel management are excellent. At the
same time the look-out problem can be easily handled by a flight of four
and handled adequately by an element. If the tactical situation dictates that
elements must be employed, an altitude somewhere between 25,000 and
30,000 feet might be more appropriate to reduce the look-out problem. In
any case, the medium altitudes provide a position from which an attack
may be launch against aircraft at very high or very low altitudes.
Procedures for Flying Element Formation
1. Flying the Position of Wingman in Patrol Formation.
a. Maintain a patrol position off the leader’s wing by flying lineabreast at approximately 2,500 feet out when in straight-and-level flight. If
you fly closer, look-out capability will be sacrificed. If you fly further out,
initial maneuverability as well as final maneuverability will be sacrificed
after initial contact with the enemy.
b. Play the outside as well as the inside of the turn for mutual
coverage. If an attempt is made to stay on the inside of the turn without a
crossover, you will only fall back when the leader rolls out of his turn.
c. Maneuver through both the vertical and horizontal planes in order
to fly a relative position off the leader. While on the inside of the turn, you
will be in an extended-low position. On the outside of the turn, you will be
in an extended-high position in the plane of the leader’s aircraft.

119

d. Lower your nose and cross to the inside if you are on the outside
of the turn. If you are on the inside, sliding forward, cross to the outside
then slide high and fly in the plane of the leader. If the initial turn is into
you, pull up, cross over and behind your leader, then cross from outside
to inside and vice versa in the manner just discussed. This technique will
cause you to describe a circular movement in the plane of the leader’s
aircraft. You will be moving forward in the bottom half of the circle and
backward in the top half. This will enable you to easily maintain position
and provide mutual coverage during the entire turn.
e. Do not cross in front of your leader. Always maintain nose-tail
separation.
2. Flying the Fighting Position as a Wingman in Element Formation
a. Fly in a 60° cone, in a fighting position, about 1,000 feet back.
b. Maneuver through both the horizontal and vertical planes to
maintain position. Slide high when overshooting and drop low when
falling back, in order to maintain position on the leader.
c. Attempt to keep your fuselage aligned with your leader’s during
all maneuvers. This will enable you to match your leader’s maximum
performance and will prevent you from becoming separated.
d. Attempt to stay out of the in-trail position as much as possible. By
doing this, the leader may cover you more adequately.
Procedures for Flying the Fluid-Four Patrol
1. Flying Position of Fluid Element Leader
a. Position the element, line-abreast, about 5,000 to 7,000 feet out and
approximately 2,000 feet above the lead element.
b. Maintain a relative position to your leader during turns. If you are
on the outside of the turn, drop your nose and cross to the other side when
you find yourself losing out and falling back. When being turned into, and
you find yourself creeping forward, slide high and/or cross to the outside
of the turn to maintain position. In other words, play the vertical as well as
the horizontal plane in order to maintain supporting position.
c. Lower your nose to gain airspeed and position when you find
yourself too far back after rolling out of a turn. When you regain your
forward position you may pull back to the original fluid position.

120

d. Pull your nose up and kill off airspeed if you find yourself too far
forward after rolling out of a turn. You may also retard throttle, however
this is not advised when at altitude. When you regain your correct relative
position, lower the nose to maintain proper vertical separation. All
maneuvers must be smooth to prevent over-correction.
e. Bank from side to side and look below when crossing from the
inside high to the outside of the lead element. This will prevent you from
losing the lead element during crossovers.
f. Cover the forward hemisphere, along with the flight leader, as
primary responsibility in an effort to visually acquire a target so that an
attack may be launched against it. As a secondary responsibility, cover
the rear hemisphere behind the lead element in order to detect a possible
missile attack.
2. Flying Position of Wingman in Fluid-Four Patrol
a. Maintain a position from line-abreast to 20° back and 1500 feet out
on the side opposite the element.
b. Maneuver through both the horizontal and vertical planes to
maintain position during turns. Fly high when overshooting and drop low
to the inside when falling back.
c. Cover the rear hemisphere, behind the other element, at all times.
This is your responsibility and your coverage is necessary to detect any
possible missile attacks. Your opposite number in the other element, will be
providing you the same coverage.

121

CHAPTER IV
FLIGHT TACTICS
To employ a flight of four or an element of two in a fighter-versusfighter engagement, only a few new basic maneuvers must be mastered.
The previous maneuvers we have learned still apply in flight tactics. With
this in mind, we will now concern ourselves with tactics when operation
as a flight of four and/or as an element of two. We will objectively analyze
offensive and defensive situations in which we have element-versuselement (two-versus-two) element versus a flight of four (two-versus-four)
and a flight of four versus a flight of four (four-versus-four). For our first
engagement, let’s assume that we have an element of two attacking another
element of two.
Two Attacking Two
To attack an element with an element, the maneuvers and procedures
learned in the section on Fighter Maneuvers and Tactical Formation will
be employed to gain an advantage. The attacking element will attempt
to set up for a missile attack. The defending element will counter with
a defensive turn in an effort to preclude this attack. The attackers will
maneuver for a follow-up gun attack by cutting off or yo-yoing to the
defender’s angular velocity cone, or they will attempt to deliver a missile
in a secondary attack by employing the roll-off or the barrel-roll attack.
If the attackers are unable to set up for a missile launch but are able to set
up for a 20mm cannon attack, the defenders will be placed in a precarious
position. If the defending element continues to maneuver as a single
element without being able to shake the attacking element – the attacking
element will simply move in and shoot down the wingman, then the leader.
To prevent this possibility, the defending element may attempt a defensive
split. This split may be executed so that the leader and the wingman turn in
opposite direction through the vertical and horizontal plane or in the same
direction with horizontal or vertical separation.
If the defensive split is executed with the defending leader and
wingman turning away from one another, the attacking element can split
and continue the attack as individual fighting units, or maintain element
integrity and continue the attack on one member of the splitting element.
If the attackers split, they retain offensive advantage against the splitting
defenders. However, they incur a defensive advantage, in terms of look-out
capability, against an attack from another enemy element. To maintain an
offensive capability in terms of maneuverability, and a defensive capability
in terms of look-out, the attackers should maintain element integrity.
To continue the attack against one member of this splitting element, the
attackers may select either member if the split is in the horizontal plane.
The
122

defender not selected must then continue the turn or reverse in an effort
to provide his teammate mutual support. If the free defender continues the
turn, he will meet his teammate and the attacking element from a nosequarter position and will be in a poor position to provide effective support.
If the free defender reverses he will be in a better position; however, he will
still be unable to provide effective mutual support. The distance generated
by splitting in opposite directions, plus the time needed to execute the
reversal, will place the free defender at too high an angle-off to launch a
missile and beyond effective range to deliver a 20mm cannon attack. The
attacking element should select the high trailing defender if the split in
opposite directions is conducted through both the vertical and horizontal
planes. If the low, forward defender were selected, the free high defender
would be able to roll off and move inside the attacking element’s angular
velocity cone for a 20mm cannon attack. On the other hand, if the high
trailing defender is selected, the low free defender has the same problems
in supporting his teammate as did the free defender in the horizontal
split. By geometric inspection, we can see that a defensive split in opposite
directions is not effective, because a permanent separation of the defenders
is achieved with the free defender unable to drive the attacking element off
his teammate.
If the defensive split is conducted with one defender executing a
max-performance turn in the horizontal plane (or slightly nose-down
in the vertical plane) and the other defender turning in the same relative
direction, nose-high at less than maximum performance, the attacking
element is faced with a defensive split difficult to contend with. See figure
38. In this split – with the defenders turning in the same relative direction,
but separated in the horizontal and vertical planes – the free defender can
more easily maneuver to support his teammate, since he will not be out of
range, nor out of phase in terms of angular velocity. To maneuver against a
split of this nature, the attacking element may employ one of five possible
options: (1) Dive in and attack the low-inside defender, (2) Attack the high
outside defender, (3) Split and continue the attack against each individual
defender, (4) Initiating an attack against the low defender, and switch the
attack to the high defender after the low defender is well committed in a
defensive turn, and (5) Perform a fluid separation to drive the low defender
out of the fight, then regain element integrity and continue the attack
against the high defender.
If the attacking element drives in after the low-inside defender (option
1) the high defender will be in position to launch an attack against the
attacking element’s six-o’clock position. The attacking element will be
sandwiched between the two defenders with an obvious loss of offensive
potential, and a possible sacrifice of a wingman in an effort to destroy the
low defender. If the attacking element attacks the high defender, the high
defender can reverse-roll or roll underneath,

123

Figure 38

124
DEFENSIVE SPLIT

down and away from his teammate. The free defender can then simply
reverse-roll and sandwich the attacking element between he two defenders.
Once again, the attacking element’s wingman will be placed at a severe
disadvantage if this attack is continued. If the attacking element splits and
continues the attack against each individual defender, the attackers have an
immediate advantage since the defending element will be unable to effect
mutual support. However, this advantage can be short-lived if the split
attacking element is, in turn, attacked by another enemy. The attacking
element will have sacrificed look-out capability and mutual support, thus
becoming an easy set-up for the new enemy. For this reason, we do not
advocate an offensive split as a means of countering the defensive split.
If the attacking element initiates an attack against the low defender in a
defensive split, then switches the attack to the high defender, the attacking
element can maintain its offensive advantage without needlessly sacrificing
a wingman. See figure 39. To employ this course of action correctly, the
attacking element should drive in and select the low defender. When the
low defender observes this action, he will be forced to tighten his turn
to prevent himself from becoming an easy target. This action by the low
defender will cause him to be driven further from his teammate, with
reduced maneuvering potential. If the attacking element handles this initial
maneuver correctly, the low defender may be driven completely out of
the fight. The attacking element should switch the attack to the high man
after the low defender is well committed in his defensive turn. The switch
should be performed before reaching the high defender’s line-abreast
position and before zoom potential is sacrificed. If the attack against the
low defender is prolonged, the attacking element will experience airspeed
decay, hence a loss in zoom potential when the switch is made against
the high defender. If airspeed decay reduces zoom to the extent where
the high defender can counter with a zoom through a greater angle, the
attacking element will be forced out front and below the high defender.
A nose-high reversal by the low defender at this point will sandwich the
attacking element in the vertical plane. To preclude this possibility, the
attacking element should switch and zoom soon enough to force the high
defender to turn into the attack. During the switch, the attacking wingman
should closely observe the low defender’s subsequent actions, to determine
whether he is out of the fight or is reverse-rolling in an effort to maneuver
into the attacking element’s six-o’clock position If the low defender is
out of the fight, the attacking element can continue to engage the high
defender. If the low defender is till a threat and reverse-rolls, the attacking
element should disengage the high defender, roll wings-level and zoom in
the vertical plane, while it still enjoys the airspeed advantage. As shown
in our discussion of Fighter Maneuvers, a zoom under these conditions
enables the attacking element to reduce its horizontal velocity component
in relation to the defender. As a result, the defender is force below and
forward and the attacking element need only roll off and maneuver toward
the trailing defender’s six-o’clock position. During the roll-off, once again,

125

Figure 39

126

SWITCHING THE ATTACK TO THE HIGH DEFENDER

the attacking wingman must observe the actions of the defender not under
attack to determine whether or not he will be a threat.
Another tactic that can be used to successfully counter the defensive
split is the fluid separation. See figure 40. In a fluid separation, the
attacking element initially drives after the low-inside defender. After this
initial feint, the leader than resumes the attack against the high defender.
Meanwhile, the attacking wingman performs a fluid separation to force
the low defender down and out of the fight. The attacking wingman does
not split from his leader to initiate a one-versus-one engagement. Instead,
he simply checkmates a possible counter-move by the low defender, while
providing the attacking leader visual cross-coverage during the entire
maneuver. When the low defender has been definitely committed out of
the fight, the attacking wingman rejoins the leader at normal interval.
At the same time, he visually observes the down-and-out defender for a
possible threat. After rejoining, the attacking element presses the attack
with a two-against-one advantage over the high defender. To make the
fluid separation a successful tactic, the attacking wingman must play
the separation so that he is able to rejoin the leader after forcing the
low defender out of the fight. If the attacking leader has an experienced
wingman, and one whom he can trust not to split, the fluid separation is
the best counter for a defensive split. If the wingman is inexperienced or
lacks talent, the best tactic would be to maintain element integrity, attack
the low defender (in an effort to drive him out of the fight) then switch and
continue the attack against the high defender.
Procedures for Maneuvering Against a Defensive Split
1. Attempt to force the low defender down and out of the fight. You
are trying to force the weakest man out of the fight to give you a two-toone advantage. Normally the wingman will be the low defender with the
least experience.
2. Do not prolong your attack on the low defender. This may kill off
too much airspeed and result in a loss of offensive advantage when you
attempt to zoom behind the high defender.
3. Switch the attack to the high defender. This maneuver should be
performed before you lose too much airspeed and before the high defender
reaches your line abreast position.
4. Perform a fluid separation and allow your wingman to force the low
defender down and out of the fight. This maneuver should be performed
only if the wingman is fairly experienced. He should not attempt to destroy
the low defender, but should force him down and out of the fight as quickly
as possible, while maintaining a visual look-out on the leader. If your
wingman is relatively inexperienced,

127

Figure 40

128
PERFORMING A FLUID SEPARATION

(and/or untrustworthy) you should maintain close element integrity and
simply switch from low to high defender.
5. Rejoin the leader as soon as the low defender has been definitely
committed out of the fight. Do not follow the low defender too far or
element integrity and all mutual support will be sacrificed.
6. Complete the attack with a two-against-one advantage. The
wingman should continue to closely observe the low defender to prevent
any counter-attack.
Defending Two when Attacked by Two
The defending element should maneuver as a single unit to counter a
missile launch and a follow-up 20mm cannon attack. The tactics illustrated
in fighter maneuvers apply equally as well with an element as with a single
aircraft. The defensive split should not be employed to counter the missile
attack. To successfully deliver AIM-9B against a maneuvering defending
element, requires a launch at ranges in excess of 5,000 feet. A launch under
these conditions can be easily nullified by generating angular velocity. A
split is not necessary. If employed, the defending element, will be forced
into a permanent separation, without the necessary mutual support to
counter the follow-up gun attack. The attacking element, at its leisure,
may move in for the kill against one defender without interference from
his teammate. The defensive split should be employed when there is no
possibility of shaking the attackers as they approach gun firing range
(3,000 feet). To set it up, the defending leader should declare the split. On
signal, the inside defender (usually the wingman) should tighten up his
turn in the plane of the attack. The other defender (usually the leader)
should maintain his turn and spread out, as well as up, to effect the split.
If the split is conducted in the horizontal plane, this means that the inside
defender will be turning level or in a slight nose-down attitude, wile his
teammate will be turning in the horizontal plane and also up through
the vertical plane. See figure 41. At the time the split is declared, certain
responsibilities exist between the inside and outside defenders. The
inside defender no longer provides visual cross-coverage to his teammate.
Instead, he devotes his entire attention to the attackers in order that he
may play the attack and determine the attackers’ subsequent action. The
high-outside defender, on the other hand, determines the magnitude of
the split by playing his position in respect to his teammate as well as to the
attacking element. Confronted with the split, the attacking element must
now make a decision as to whether to attack the low-inside defender, attack
the high-outside defender, or split and continue the attack against each
defender. In considering these three possibilities, the attacking element can
initiate one of five possible courses of action: (1) Attack the low defender,
(2) Attack the high defender, (3) Split and attack each individual defender,
(4) Initiate or feint an attack against the
129

Figure 41

130
DEFENSIVE SPLIT

low-inside defender, then switch and continue the attack against his highoutside teammate, or (5) Initiate an attack against the low defender and
perform a fluid separation in which the attacking leader selects the high
defender while the attacking wingman drives the low defender out of the
fight, then rejoins the leader on the attack against the high defender.
If the attacking element drives in after the low defender (figure
42), the low defender fights as a single aircraft in an effort to gain an
offensive advantage. At the same time, the high defender drives in after
the attacking element in an effort to force them to break off the attack.
During this process, the low defender does not compromise his position
to set up his teammate in the attacking element’s six-o’clock position. It is
the high defender’s responsibility to gain an offensive advantage without a
compromising assist from the low defender. If the low defender can achieve
an immediate offensive advantage against the attacking element, the high
defender should immediately clear his teammate and allow him to set up
for the kill. Mutual support of this nature enables the defending element to
exploit any advantage with dispatch.
If the attacking element attacks the high-outside defender, the highoutside defender should immediately play the attack in an effort to acquire
an offensive advantage. Once again, the defender under attack (high
defender) should not compromise his position to set up his teammate
to gain an advantage. This means that the high defender must force the
attackers to overshoot. The overshoot may be generated by executing a
max-performance turn into the attack or by employing the high-G roll
underneath, see figure 43. Considering the geometric position of the two
defenders, the high-G roll underneath would be the better maneuver. The
roll underneath will not compromise the high defender’s position, yet it
will make it easier for the low defender to move into the attacking element’s
vulnerable six-o’clock position, because the final portion of the roll will be
away from the low defender. The moment the inside-low defender observes
the attacking element driving after his teammate, he should pull out of
his defensive turn and drive toward the attacker’s six-o’clock position. If
the high defender performs a high-G roll underneath, the low defender
can achieve a lethal position by executing a simple reversal or a roll-off
maneuver. (See figure 43). If the high defender turns down into the attack,
toward the low defender, the low defender will be forced to execute a nosehigh reversal followed by a roll-off to move into the attacking element’s
six-o’clock position within 20mm cannon range. In this position, the low
defender either forces the attackers to break off or he clears his leader, in
the event his leader gains an offensive position.
If the attacking element splits (each attacker taking a defender) to
counter a defensive split, the defenders must break element integrity and
fight as single elements in an effort to elude the attackers.

131

Figure 42

132

SANDWICHING THE ATTACKERS IF THEY SELECT A LOW DEFENDER

Figure 43

133

GAINING THE ADVANTAGE IF THE ATTACKER SELECTS THE HIGH DEFENDER

During this portion of the engagement each defender must disregard his
teammate’s actions until he is able to successfully evade his opponent. The
purpose of this action is to prevent the defenders from compromising
their respective defensive position. The first defender able to elude his
attacker should maneuver to support his teammate as soon as possible.
If the attacker is an especially aggressive type, this may be impossible
until the defender destroys him. The one-versus-one fight caused by the
attackers’ split is the only engagement which causes a permanent split of
the defensive element. However, this is necessary to preclude loss of both
members of the defending element.
If the attacking element initiates or feigns an attack against the
low defender (in an effort to drive him out of the fight) then switches
the attack to the high defender, (figure 44) the defending element must
maneuver initially as though the attack were directed against the low
defender. During the initial portion of this engagement – before the switch
is attempted – the high defender should note whether or not the attacking
element attempts to prolong the attack against the low defender. To stay
with the low defender too long means that the attacking element will
experience considerable airspeed decay. If the high defender observes this
sort of action by the attacking element, he should not turn or roll down
into the attack when the switch occurs. Instead he should roll wings-level
and zoom in the vertical plane. Since the attackers have dissipated their
maneuvering airspeed they will be unable to match the high defender’s
rotation angle and subsequent zoom (see section on Maneuvering after
a Turn Overshoot, in Fighter Maneuvers): The attacking element will
be forced below and in front of the high defender. During the switch,
if the low defender has rolled nose-high out of his defensive turn, he
will move toward the attacker’s 6 o’clock-low position and the attacking
element will be caught, with little or no maneuvering airspeed in a vertical
sandwich in front of both the high and low defenders. If they remain in
this position, the high defender need only execute a roll-off toward the
attacker’s six-o’clock position. If the attackers attempt to dive away, they
will position themselves in front of the low defender. In either case, the
defending element now has the advantage. If the attacking element does
not bleed off airspeed – by prolonging the attack against the low defender
– prior to executing a switch, the high defender must turn down into the
attack or perform a high-G roll underneath, to counter the switch. See
figure 45. Although the high defender is provided less opportunity to
gain an advantage by this action, the low defender is provided a greater
opportunity. The reason for the low defender’s greater opportunity is
that he will not be forced to stay in his max-performance turn so long.
This means that he will have more maneuvering airspeed, hence a greater
opportunity to maneuver into the attacker’s six-o’clock position after they
perform the switch. As a result, the low defender can clear his teammate, in
the event he gains an advantage, or he can quickly provide mutual support
and force the attacker to break off his attack on the high defender.

134

Figure 44

135

SWITCHING THE ATTACK TO THE HIGH DEFENDER

If the attackers perform a “fluid separation” as a means of countering
the defensive split, the defenders will be hard-pressed. To them, a fluid
separation will appear as an offensive split. Therefore, they will be forced
to initially treat this tactic as a split, and maneuver accordingly. The
first indication that the tactic is a fluid separation, rather than a split,
will be when the attacking wingman breaks off the inside defender and
rejoins the leader in an attack against he high defender. The moment the
attacking wingman breaks off and attempts to regain normal element
integrity with his leader, the low defender discontinues the defensive
turn. He will reverse-roll, nose-high and maneuver toward the attacking
wingman’s six-o’clock position. Meanwhile, the high defender should
be turning down through the vertical plane into the attacking leader. A
high-G roll underneath may or may not be performed, depending upon
the circumstances. If there is considerable separation between the attacking
leader and his wingman, a roll underneath may force the attacking leader
to overshoot. However, because of the separation, it can easily place the
attacking wingman at the high defender’s six-o’clock position. To preclude
this possibility, the high defender should turn down through the vertical
plane to counter the attacking leader and let his teammate provide
mutual support by driving in after the attacking wingman. If there is not
considerable separation between the attacking leader and his wingman, the
high defender may employ the high-G roll underneath in an effort to drive
the attackers forward. At the same time, this will enable the low defender
to more easily clear or provide mutual support. If the fluid separation is
performed correctly, a great deal of pressure is exerted against the defensive
split. The defending element must exercise skillful maneuvering technique
along with excellent judgment and timing to counter the attacking
element’s advantage. It can be accomplished, but it demands a maximum in
team coordination.
Procedures for Employing the Defensive Split
1. Performing the Defensive Split.
a. Perform a defensive split if unsuccessful in eluding an opponent by
all other maneuvers. This split should be initiated when the attackers are
approximately 3000 feet to the rear.
b. Declare the split to the wingman so that he may turn to the inside
and play the attack.
c. Slide high and to the outside when maneuvering as a leader. You
should play the pull-up to maintain a supporting position upon the
wingman.
d. Do not kill off airspeed by abrupt or violent maneuvers. You are
attempting to force the attackers to concentrate their effort

136

on one defender, therefore you must maintain sufficient airspeed for future
maneuvering.
2. Executing the Defensive Split when the Attacker Select the Low
Defender.
a. Continue a level or slightly nose-low maximum turn when
maneuvering as the low defender (wingman). A low defender should not
lower his nose excessively, since the attacking element is trying to force
him down and out of the fight.
b. Attempt to sandwich the attacking element when maneuvering
as the high defender. While you are performing this maneuver, the low
defender will attempt to generate an overshoot and gain offensive potential.
c. Play the low defender’s evasive maneuvering to achieve a firing
position. If the low defender maneuvers onto the offense, you should
support the attack.
3. Executing the Defensive Split when the Attacking Element Selects the
High Defender.
a. Perform a hard turn into the attack or a high-G roll underneath
when maneuvering as the high defender. This will prevent your attacker
from being able to position for a kill.
b. Call the low defender to reverse and pull up after the attackers.
The low defender should be alert and execute the reversal the instant the
attackers select the high defender. This will force the attacking element into
a sandwich.
c. Continue evasive action in an effort to gain an offensive advantage.
If, as high defender, you gain this advantage, the low defender will support
your attack.
d. Play the high defender’s evasive action (when maneuvering as low
defender) to achieve a firing position, if he is unable to elude the attackers.
4. Playing the Defensive Split when Attacking Element Splits
a. Split into a one-versus-one situation.
b. Maneuver as necessary to elude your opponent (see section
covering Fighter Maneuvers).
c. Disregard your teammate’s actions until you are able to successfully
evade your opponent. By doing this, you will not compromise your
defensive position.

137

d. Attempt to rejoin and support one another as soon as possible. You
may be forced to destroy your opponent before effecting a rejoin.
5. Executing the Defensive Split when the Attack Switches from Low
Defender to High Defender.
a. Maneuver initially as outlined in the Section describing the attack
on the low defender.
b. Observe to determine whether or not the attackers prolong their
attack on the low defender. If the attackers attempt to stay with the low
defender too long, they will lose airspeed very rapidly. If this condition
prevails, the high defender should roll wings-level when the attackers
execute their switch. If the attacking element has killed its airspeed, it will
be unable to match the high defender’s rotation angle and will be forced
below and forward. During the switch, the low defender should perform a
nose-high reversal to catch the attackers in a vertical sandwich.
c. Turn down into the attack or execute a high-G roll underneath
when maneuvering as a high defender, if the attackers do not decrease
airspeed prior to executing the switch.
d. Execute an immediate roll-out when maneuvering as a low
defender. This maneuver should be initiated after the switch to the high
defender.
e. Play the high defender’s subsequent action in order to gain a firing
position or to support any offensive action taken by the high defender.
Attacking Four with Two
To gain maximum advantage, an attacking element should strike at
six-o’clock-low in an effort to deliver AIM-9B. If the flight of four fails to
detect the attack the attacking element should pick out the nearest target
and launch a missile. If the flight of four wheels around in a effort to nullify
the attack, the attacking element should re-position behind the defending
trailing element. From here, the attacking element should drive in and set
up for a secondary missile attack – by employing the barrel-roll attack – or
a follow-up 20mm cannon attack, in the event it is impossible to reposition
for AIM-9B. If the flight of four splits into two separate fighting elements,
the attacking element should switch to the outside trailing element and
continue its attack. During the switch the attacking wingman should
closely observe the defending element to determine if it will provide
mutual support to the element under attack. If the free element can provide
mutual support, the attacking element should roll wings-level,

138

zoom in the vertical plane, and once again reposition behind the trail­ing
element. See figure 46. When the defending elements are no longer able to
provide mutual support, the attacking element should move in for the kill
behind the trailing defending element.
Attacking a Flight of Four with Four
To attack a flight of four, AIM-9B equipped attacking elements should
maneuver into the defender’s blind area in an effort to set up for a missile
attack without being detected. If successful in this endeavor, each attacking
element should line-up behind a respective defending element in the
flight of four. On signal, the attacking element leaders should launch their
missiles. If the defenders fail to maneuver, they will lose two aircraft (one
out of each element) and be set up as individual defenders with a two-toone disadvantage against their respective attacking elements. In describing
this type of attack, a better method may appear obvious: To have each
individual attacker launch AIM-9B against the individual defenders. This
may be accomplished, however the coordination and timing needed before
the defenders execute a counter-maneuver, make it appear unlikely. In
addition, this tactic destroys the attacking element’s look-out capability.
If the defending elements detect the attack and maneuver against it,
the attacking elements will be unable to maneuver line-abreast and launch
their missiles simultaneously. Instead, the attacking elements will be forced
in-train (element behind element) to attack as a flight of four against one
of the defending elements, or to attack as individual elements against the
respective defending elements. If the attack­ing elements maneuver as a
flight of four, against one of the defending elements, the free defending
element will be provided an opportunity to maneuver behind the flight
of four. If each attacking element selects a defending element, mutual
support becomes almost impossible since each defending element must
maneuver against its respective attacker to counter a possible missile
launch. Considering AIM-9B, this means that the defending elements
can no longer maneuver in respect to one another, but must maneuver
in respect to their individual at­tackers. As a result, the four-versus-four
engagement becomes two in­dividual two-versus-two engagements,
with each attacking element attempting to set up for a missile attack or
a follow-up 20mm cannon attack. If the attackers are forced, in-train
and the two defending elements attempt to separate for mutual support,
the lead attacking element should attempt to drive the inside defending
element into a permanent separation. Before the lead attacking element
compromises his position and diminishes his airspeed, he should switch
the attack to the high-outside trailing defending element. See figure 47. At
the same time, the second attacking element should drive after the inside
defending element. This double switch by the attacking element counters
the defenders’ possibility of setting up an effective sandwich on the lead
element and the fight ends up in an element-versus-element engagement.
139

Figure 45

140

SELECTING THE OUTSIDE TRAILING ELEMENT

Figure 46

141
ATTACKING IN TRAIN

with the attacking elements enjoying the advantage. See figure 48. If the
defenders maneuver as a flight of four, the attacking elements simply drive
in after the trailing defending element, destroy it, then continue the action
against the lead defending element.
Procedures for Attacking Four with Two
1. Begin your attack on the high element. If possible, at six-o’clocklow. This will position you in your opponent’s blind area.
2. Switch your attack to the lead element after the high element is well
committed in a defensive maneuver. If the high element should reverse,
pull high and position yourself behind the trailing element while you still
have an airspeed advantage.
3. Drive in again and attack the trailing element. If the defenders
attempt (and are able) to provide mutual support, slide high once again
behind the trailing element.
4. Continue this procedure until the defending elements are unable to
provide mutual support, then drive in and attain a firing position behind
the trailing element. Your wingman should keep you informed as to the
whereabouts of the free element, to prevent any possible counter-attack.
Procedures for Attacking Four with Four
1. Attempt to maneuver your flight into the defender’s blind area
without being detected. If successful in this endeavor, line up each
attacking element behind a defending element. On signal, the attack­ing
element leaders will launch missiles to eliminate two of the de­fenders. If
the defending elements observe this attack and maneuver to counter it,
employ the following procedures.
2. Continue the attack, element against element, in an effort to
prevent the defending elements from setting up a mutual support situation.
If the defending elements’ maneuvers force you to attack in­-train, they may
separate the elements and attempt mutual support. To counter this tactic,
employ the following procedures.
3. Drive in (as lead attacking element) after the inside defending
element, in an effort to force the defending elements into a permanent
separation.
4. Switch your attack to the high outside defending element before
you compromise your position and diminish your airspeed. At the same
time, switch your fluid element (second element) behind the defender’s
free element. This double switch prevents the defenders from setting up
mutual support in order to sandwich the lead attacking element.
142

Figure 47

143

ELEMENT VS ELEMENT AFTER AN ATTACK IN TRAIN

5. Press the attack as separate elements. This allows each element to
take advantage of its superior position. Also, it prevents the defenders from
effecting a re-join and subsequent mutual support.
6. Maneuver behind the trailing element if you have the whole flight
breaking in the same direction.
Defending Four when Attacked by Two
To successfully defend a flight of four, the defenders must detect the
attack and determine the number executing the attack. If the de­fenders
are certain there is only one element performing the attack, their course
of action is simple. The moment they pick up the attack­ing element, they
must determine against which defending element the attack is being
executed. The element being attacked turns away from its supporting
element. This means that if the attack is directed against the high element,
it turns down and away from the lead element. If the attacking element
continues to press its attack against the fluid element, the lead element
simply rolls in behind the attackers. If the attacking element switches its
attack to the lead element, the lead element turns into the attack and the
free defending element reverses nose-high, then follows through with a
roll-off to move into the attack­ing element’s six-o’clock position. See figure
49. The attacking element, caught in a sandwich, will now be forced to
maneuver against the attacking defending element or face the possibility of
being de­stroyed.
Defending Four when Attacked by Four
If the attacking elements drive in and line up behind each defend­
ing element, the defending elements must fight separate element-versus­element engagements. If mutual support is attempted, one of the defending
elements will be forced to maneuver in respect to the other defend­ing
element. Such a tactic, with an attacking element in lethal position, would
be disastrous. If the attacking elements maintain flight integrity, mutual
support may be initiated. The element under attack turns away from its
supporting element. If the attackers continue this attack, the supporting
or fluid element drives in and sandwiches the flight of four. During the
attempt for mutual support, if the attacking lead element switches the
attack to the outside defending element, and the attacking fluid element
drives in after the inside defending element, the defending elements must
maneuver as separate elements.
Procedures for Defending Four when Attacked by Two
1. Check to be sure there is only one element performing the attack.

144

Figure 48

145

ROLLING OFF BEHIND THE ATTACKING FREE ELEMENT

2. Turn the element under attack away from the supporting element.
3. Turn the supporting element in on the attackers, if the attack
switches to the supporting element. The attackers are sandwiched once
again, but in reverse order.
Procedures for Defending Four when Attacked by Four
1. Fight as separate elements, if the attacking elements initiate
simultaneous attacks against each defending element. Mutual support,
attempted against this tactic, will only compromise the position of one of
the defending elements.
2. If the attackers maintain flight integrity and attack either one of
the defending elements, employ mutual support and sandwich the flight of
four.
3. If the attacking lead element switches the attack to the sup­
porting element, and the attacking fluid element drives in after the inside
defending element, maneuver as separate elements.
SUMMARY
In discussing fighter-versus-fighter combat we have emphasized
the importance of turn and velocity during all maneuvers. A pilot under
attack will not be able to simply outrun his opponent - he must generate
sufficient angular velocity to prevent a successful missile launch and/or
a 20mm cannon attack. This means that “high-speed tactics” cannot be
distinguished from “low-speed tactics” since the entire field of maneuver
and capability must be considered. As long as fighter pilots are committed
to rear-hemisphere attacks, the concept depicted in this study will hold
true. New weapons such as the F-104 and F-105 aircraft and the AIM-9B
missile may change the maneuvers per se, however the principles involved
will remain the same.

146

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Evaluation Report on F-104A/GAR-8 Weapons System, 1 Feb 58.
2. Project Report 58-4 TR&D, Nellis AFB, Nevada.
3. NAVORD OD. 12663, 21 Jan 58.
4. Interim Report 51-1, TR&D, Nellis AFB, Nevada
5. CTAF Manual 51-1, 26 Nov 56.
6. Air Combat Maneuvering - Captain John Boyd. Nellis Air Force Base.
Fighter Weapons Newsletter, June 1957, 3-31.
7. The Perfect Missile and Gun Attack - Captain Hal Vincent, USMC. UMF
334 MCAF, El Toro, Class 60-A. Fighter Weapons Newsletter, March 1959,
24-26.
8. Final Engineering Report on Sidewinder System Studies - Westinghouse
Electric Corporation, 14 Feb 58
9. NAVORD Report 5808, 2 Dec 57.
10. NOTS 1739.
11. NAVORD Report 4914, Jan 58.
12. AFM 335-25.
13. TF Project 19234 Storyboard, 23 Apt 58.

147