MANEUVERING FOR THE ATTACK
Success, in air-to-air combat, depends on the ability of a pilot to place
himself in a position from which he can deliver his fire power. In fighterversus-bomber combat, time is important also and can be considered a
measurement of success. To illustrate: If we have a bomber attempting
to destroy a given target, we must not only position ourselves to deliver
our fire power, but must also expedite our positioning before the bomber
reaches “bombs away” points. Since timing is so critical, we must use the
very best method by which we can position ourselves for this attack. As
we have shown, the best weapon in terms of performance and ease of
delivery, is AIM-9B. The best attack with this weapon and our aircraft, is
the underside attack. Positioning for this attack depends upon the space
relationship between you and the target. Considering this relationship, GCI
may provide a set-up from three possible positions.

31

Figure 15
32
ROLL-SLIDE ATTACK

1. Nose-quarter
2. Abeam, or 90°
3. Tail-quarter
Assuming VFR conditions, it will be the responsibility of each attacker –
upon visually acquiring the target – to maneuver from any one of these
set-ups to the firing envelope behind the target. To get into this position
quickly, an attacker must maneuver in a three-dimensional field to acquire
the maximum benefits from airspeed and turn. If the attacker does not
understand three-dimensional maneuvering, he will be little more effective
than GCI in maneuvering from a setup or approach, to a final firing
position (GCI will place him in the firing envelope through the use of twodimensional maneuvers).
The Nose-Quarter Attack: In performing the nose-quarter attack, we
do not choose to approach our target from a direct head-on position. If we
do, we will be forced to perform a 180° change of direction by executing
a level or a climbing turn (high-speed yo-yo) to approach our target from
a six-o’clock position. The time consumed in a level turn allows the target
to generate a great amount of longitudinal separation. This allows the
target aircraft to make considerable penetration of a defense area before
the attacker can set up a missile attack. The climbing turn or high-speed
yo-yo allows the attacker to complete his change of direction in less time;
however, at the end of this maneuver, the attacker will find himself with
considerable longitudinal separation in relation to the target, since his
airspeed has decayed considerably below that of the target. Once again,
the target aircraft will effect considerable penetration before the attacker
can position himself to launch AIM-9B. If the attacker is directed by GCI
for a nose-quarter attack, he should request GCI to set him up on an
anti-parallel course to an offset point 15,000 feet to one side of the target’s
line of flight. When the attacker visually acquires the target, or when GCI
indicates that he is ten miles from the target, the attacker should apply full
afterburner power. At the same time, he should dive to an altitude about
5,000 feet below the target, so he will be offset in both the vertical and
horizontal planes. This provides the attacker with maneuvering airspeed
and a position from which to execute a chandelle followed by a low-speed
yo-yo (a dive behind and below the target) to the attack cone behind the
target. See figure 16. Compared to a level turn, this maneuver allows the
attacker to complete his 180° change of direction more rapidly. In addition,
since the attacker is turning through both the vertical and horizontal
planes, his horizontal turning component is reduced. As a result of these
two factors – fast turn rate and small turn radius – the attacker will be in
a position much nearer the target’s attack cone. To prevent the target from
penetrating the defense area excessively, the attacker must dive behind and
below the target at the completion of 90°

33

Figure 16

34
NOSE-QUARTER ATTACK

of turn. This will aid the attacker in recouping the speed lost in the
chandelle. Also, it allows him to turn inside the target’s line of flight,
because he is able to reduce his horizontal turning component by
maneuvering through both the vertical and horizontal planes. Result:
The attacker quickly positions himself – at six-o’clock-low – to launch
Sidewinder.
The Beam or 90° Approach: In a beam approach, our problem
remains essentially the same as that in a nose-quarter attack. That is, we
must quickly place the attacker in a launch position, to reduce penetration
time. The best means by which to accomplish this, upon visually acquiring
the target, is to use afterburner and perform a diving turn, below and
behind the target’s line of flight. Once again, afterburner, coupled with a
descending turn, will increase rate of closure, because of rapid acceleration.
At the same time, since the turn is through both the vertical and horizontal
planes, a cutoff is easily effected. Result: the attacker is quickly set up for
a missile attack from six-o’clock-low. If the beam attack starts from a high
position, the same procedures should still be used. Remember, the attacker
wants to reduce the target’s penetration time. At the same time, he wants
to set up for the best possible attack. A diving turn or low-speed yo-yo will
satisfy both of these conditions. If a beam attack is initiated from a low
position, the previous procedures still apply, since the attacker is trying
to reduce target penetration time by rapid closure and a cutoff inside the
target’s line of flight.
In a tail-quarter attack, the problem of defense area penetration is
most critical. To reduce this penetration time and to allow the attacker to
position himself for the best possible missile attack, he must accomplish a
dive below and inside his opponent’s line of flight, up to an attack position
(inside yo-yo). Since penetration time is so critical, the procedure will
remain the same whether the attack starts from a high or low position.