Overhead Attack
Underside Attack
Nose-quarter Attack

17
18
19
21
22

The Best Type of Attack against a Non-Maneuvering Target with AIM-9B
Overhead Attack
High side Attack
Six-O’Clock Attack
Underside Attack

22
22
24
25
25

Best Type of Attack against a Non-maneuvering Target with the 20 mm Cannon

27

Maneuvering for the Attack

31

Flight Tactics

35

Summary – Fighter vs Bomber

38

Part II – Fighter vs Fighter
Introduction

41

Chapter 1 - Basic Limitations of AIM-9B against a Maneuvering Target

42

Chapter 2 - Fighter Maneuvers
Defensive Turn
Procedures for the Defensive Turn
Adverse Yaw
The Scissors Maneuver
Procedures for the Scissors Maneuver
Countering the Scissors Maneuver
Procedures for Maneuvering against a Scissors Counter
Procedures for Maneuvering Against a Scissors Counter

49
51
53
53
55
56
58
61
61

The Attack
Procedures for the Initial Attack
High-Speed Yo-Yo
Procedures for the High-Speed Yo-Yo
Procedures for Countering the High-Speed Yo-Yo
Barrel-Roll Attack
Procedures for the Barrel-Roll Attack
Procedures for Countering the Barrel-Roll Maneuver
The Low-Speed Yo-Yo
Procedures for the Low-Speed Yo-Yo
Procedures for Countering the Low-Speed Yo-Yo
Countering the Overhead Attack with a Negative Delta Mach
Procedures for Countering the Overhead Attack with a Negative Delta Mach
Maneuvering from an Overhead Attack with a Negative Delta Mach
Procedures for Maneuvering from an Overhead Attack with a Negative Delta Mach
The Vertical Rolling Scissors
Procedures for the Vertical Rolling Scissors
Procedures for Countering the Vertical Rolling Scissors

62
63
64
70
72
73
77
78
79
83
84
84
87
89
92
93
96
96

The High-G Barrel-Roll
The High-G Barrel-Roll over the Top
The High-G Roll Underneath
Procedures for the High-G Barrel-Roll Over the Top
Procedures for the High-G Roll Underneath
Maneuvering from a Nose-Quarter Attack
Procedures for the Nose-Quarter Attack
Procedure for Countering the Nose-Quarter Attack

97
98
101
103
105
105
110
111

Chapter 3 - Tactical formation

112

Procedures for Flying Element Formation
Flying the Position of Wingman in Patrol Formation
Flying the Fighting Position as a Wingman in Element Formation

119
119
120

Procedures for Flying the Fluid Four Patrol
Flying Position of Fluid Element Leader
Flying Position of Wingman in Fluid Four Patrol

120
120
121

Chapter 4 - Flight Tactics

122

Two Attacking Two

122

Procedures for Maneuvering Against a Defensive Split

127

Defending Two when Attacked by Two

129

Procedures for Employing the Defensive Split
Performing the Defensive Split
Executing a Defensive Split when the Attacker Selects the Low Defender
Executing the Defensive Split when the Attacking Element Selects the High Defender
Playing the Defensive Split when the Attacking Element Splits
Executing the Defensive Split when the Attack Switches from Low Defender to High Defender

136
136
137
137
137
138

Attacking Four with Two

138

Attacking a Flight of Four with Four

139

Procedures for Attacking Four with Two

142

Procedures for Attacking Four with Four

142

Defending Four when Attacked by Two

144

Defending Four when Attacked by Four

144

Procedures for Defending Four when Attacked by Two

144

Procedures for Defending Four when Attacked by Four

146

Summary – Fighter vs Fighter

146

Bibliography

147

STATEMENT OF REVIEW
1. In accordance with AFR 5-5 and in compliance with AFR 5-5/Wing
Supplement-1, Nellis Air Force Base, dated 21 March 1960, this publication
has been thoroughly reviewed by the undersigned officers, and:
a. Is considered essential for the following reasons:
(1) It satisfies a Tactical Air Command need for GAR-8 employment
information.
(2) It provides a complete and authoritative analysis of Aerial Studies for use by
all fighter units with TAC.
(3) It will be used as a reference work in support of Course No. 1115053, and
by units undergoing training in the Academic Section of the USAF Fighter
Weapons School.
b. It has been determined to be an original work which does not duplicate
any similar publication.
c. It does not contain any matter which might be considered objectionable or
subject to ridicule.
d. No further coordination is deemed necessary.

Introduction
Tactics – fighter-versus-bomber, fighter-versus-fighter, or even ground
attack – are developed according to the performance capabilities or
limitations of the weapons or weapons systems used. In other words,
effective tactics reflect the best way to employ a given weapon against
a given enemy with known or estimated capabilities. Assuming this to
be true, tactics are functional – that is, they reflect the capabilities and
limitations of the opponent’s weapons as well as our own. Therefore, in
our discussion of aerial attack, we must determine the operation envelopes
of our weapons systems (this includes the aircraft and its associated
armament). After having learned these envelope parameters, the discussion
will center on how to best employer weapons systems in a given fighterversus-fighter or fighter-versus-bomber situation, in which we assume that
our opponent has comparable capabilities.
Fighter-versus-bomber tactics will be covered first. In this phase, we
assume that a maneuvering fighter attacks a non-maneuvering target;
whereas in the fighter-versus-fighter phase, we assume that a maneuvering
fighter attacks a maneuvering target. Since the fighter-versus-bomber
situation has only one variable – the maneuvering fighter – a more exact
technical analysis can be accomplished on it. In addition, fighter-versusbomber theory is a fundamental departure point for fighter-versus-fighter
combat.

BASIC LIMITATIONS OF THE DISTURBED SIGHT AND THE 20MM
CANNON
To adequately employ the disturbed sight and the 20mm cannon, we
must understand the limitations of this equipment in any tactical situation.
The operating range of the ASG-17 disturbed sight is from 600
to 6000 feet. It will compute the proper prediction angle for a target
throughout that range, from the ground up to 50,000 feet and from zero to
nine G, if the pilot can track the target properly. However, it is improbable
that a pilot would be able to deliver a lethal burst of fire at a range greater
than 3,000 feet because of the difficulty in tracking beyond that range.
To accurately predict the lead requirement, any disturbed sight
requires the following basic information: range and target angular velocity.
In the disturbed sight, range is provided by the ranging radar, and target
angular velocity information is acquired by tracking the target aircraft.
Since the pilot is forced to turn his aircraft at a certain rate, this rate of
turn is a representation of target motion and is directly proportional to
target speed. The angular velocity of the attacking aircraft is set into the
sight through gyro action. The information is then married to the input
from the radar and the proper prediction angle is computed by placing
an electrical restraint (stiffness current) on the gyros. At long ranges,
little restraint is applied, while at short ranges a great amount of restraint
is applied. At ranges beyond 3,000 feet, little restraint is applied, thus
producing a tracking index which is quite loose and difficult to control.
Since the pilot’s responses are not precise enough, results are usually poor,
even though the equipment may be working properly.
Another limitation is the cone of dispersion of the 20mm cannon.
For the M-39, harmonization criteria specifies that 80% of all rounds fired
must impact in a 4-mil cone. As we increase firing range, bullet density will
be decreased by a function of the square (if range doubles, bullet density
quarters). At 3,000 feet, bullet density will be decreased to 1 ∕ 9 that at 1,000
feet. As a result, an attacker must fire over a longer time span in order to
deliver a lethal burst. At the same time, he must track a target smaller in
perspective. Since it is extremely difficult to track with the disturbed sight
at ranges greater than 3,000 feet, and the 20mm cone of dispersion causes
loss of effective bullet density at this range, we consider our maximum
range for the disturbed sight/20mm cannon as 3,000 feet.
BASIC LIMITATIONS OF THE AIM-9B (GAR-8) MISSILE AGAINST A
NON-MANEUVERING TARGET
AIM-9B is a supersonic infra-red-homing missile, launched in the
target’s tail cone on a pursuit course, using the fixed sight. After launch, the
missile maneuvers to establish a collision course with

1

the target. In other words, the missile determines where the target is going
and heads for that point in space. To successfully employ Sidewinder in a
given tactical situation, you must be within its firing envelope. This firing
envelope is determined by: (1) The radiation pattern of the target and
(2) The performance envelope of the missile. The radiation pattern of a
particular target is the area in which you can detect its IR radiation. The
performance envelope is determined by: Range of the missile, number of
G which the missile can pull and lambda (look -angle) limitations. Thus,
the basic limitations of the missile, against a non-maneuvering target are
determined by: Infra-red pattern, range, G and lambda. Since tactics are
developed according to the performance capabilities or limitations of the
weapons used, discussion of the limitations is in order.
IR Pattern
The missile gyro-seeker locks onto the strongest point-source of
IR radiation. For a target in military power, the strongest point-source
is the hot metal of the jet’s tailpipe. Approximately 85% of the IR signal
generated comes from this hot metal and the remaining 15% comes from
the hot jet exhaust. For a target operating in afterburner, the primary
source of radiation is the hot exhaust flame. Approximately 60% of the
signal generated comes from flame and 40% is generated by the hot metal
of the tailpipe. In the discussion of radiation patterns, it is necessary to
keep in mind the shape of the pattern. In aircraft with shielded tailpipes,
radiation patterns are generally long and relatively narrow; whereas, in
aircraft which do not have shielded tailpipes, the patterns are long and
wide. In fighter -type aircraft, the radiation pattern is generally long and
relatively narrow since the geometry of the aircraft shields the tailpipe. This
applies in military power only. In afterburner power, naturally, the pattern
is long and wide, since the flame of the afterburner is not shielded by the
jet’s aft fuselage. In both English and Soviet bomber-type airplanes, in the
horizontal plane, the jet tailpipe is shielded by the sweep-back of the wings,
thus presenting a long narrow pattern. In the vertical plane, however, the
pattern is long and wide, since the wings do not shield the hot metal and
the jet exhaust. USAF bomber-type aircraft, on the other hand, present
long and wide horizontal patterns, since the engine nacelles are suspended
below the wing, providing the gyro-seeker a relatively unrestricted view
of the jet exhaust. In the overhead vertical plane, the pattern is long and
narrow, since the wing shields the IR radiation from the gyro-seeker.
Radiation patterns vary with tailpipe temperature as well as with area of
the source. In other words, the greater the temperature, the greater the
radiation pattern; and, logically, the larger the source, the greater the
radiation pattern. To illustrate: A bomber with 8 engines in military power,
as compared to a fighter with one engine in military power, would generate
a much larger radiation pattern because the area of the source is much
greater.

2

Background IR sources are significant factors affecting the size and
shape of radiation patterns. Important background IR sources are (1) Sun,
(2) Clouds, (3) Water, (4) Snow and (5) Terrain.
(1) Sun: The sun is the strongest source of infra-red energy known.
You cannot fire Sidewinder at targets flying directly between you and the
sun, since the sun’s radiation will decoy the missile away from the target.
Therefore, do not fire at a target which is within 25° of the sun. Also, do
not continuously point the missile directly at the sun for more than ten
seconds, or the lead sulphide detector may be permanently damaged.
(2) Clouds: Clouds reflect IR radiation from the sun – particularly
cumulus clouds. If you must fire at a target which is framed against a bright
cloud background, in all probability you will be forced to reduce your slant
range to 6,000 or 8,000 feet (AFMDC ADJ SS-845) to obtain proper signal
discrimination. If the target is hidden by clouds, the clouds will confuse the
target signal so that the missile will not home. The signal which you receive
will be the background radiation reflected by the clouds. A good ruleof-thumb for flying in clouds or against a cloud background is: diminish
range until it is possible to discriminate between the background and the
target signal.
(3) Water: Water, like clouds, reflects IR energy from the sun. Calm
water is a tremendous background radiator when the sun’s images can
actually be seen in the water. Rough or choppy water, on the other hand,
reflects IR radiation in all directions and the attacker need not be in a
position where he can see the image of the sun on the water. As when
operating against a cloud background, diminish range until you can
achieve proper signal discrimination.
(4) Snow: Snow, like water and clouds, reflects the sun’s IR energy.
When firing against a snow background, as compared to a water or cloud
background, you will have to diminish your slant range much more in
order to get proper signal discrimination. There is a good possibility that
you will be forced inside the missile’s minimum range, thereby precluding
a missile attack.
(5) Terrain: Terrain background reduces maximum missile range,
as do clouds and other previously mentioned backgrounds. Light
terrain in particular, such as dry lakes and sand, provides maximum
background radiation. When firing against the three previously mentioned
backgrounds, under an overcast, max range is not diminished nearly as
much as when firing under CAVU conditions, since the clouds act as a
device for shielding out the sun’s IR radiation.

3

Range:
AIM-9B has both minimum and maximum range restrictions. Basic
minimum range for launching is 3,000 feet. This is determined by three
factors: (1) Time for the influence fuze to arm, (2) Time for the missile to
set up a collision course, and (3) Delta Mach. To be assured of a kill, all
three of these factors must be considered. First, time for the influence fuze
to arm: It has been proven through empirical testing, that approximately
85% of the kills achieved have been through influence fuze action. Since
it takes the influence fuze about two seconds to arm – at rocket motor
burn-out – a minimum range must be considered. Second, time for the
missile to set up a collision course: After launching, the missile does not
begin to guide until it clears the launch aircraft. This delay lasts for about
1 ∕ 2 second, at the end of which time the missile receives its first guidance
command and starts to set up a collision course. Third, Delta Mach (rate
of closure): At rocket motor burn-out, the missile is traveling about 1.7
Mach above the speed of the launch aircraft. If the launch aircraft has a
high rate of closure, the missile has a faster airspeed relative to the target.
Since it takes a definite time for the influence fuze to arm, and a definite
time for the missile to set up a collision course, the missile must travel a
greater distance, relative to the target, before either one of these occurs.
Missile firing range can be determined by use of the following formula:
Minimum range is equal to 3000 ± (Delta Mach × 3000). To illustrate :
If the launch aircraft is traveling at 1.2 Mach and the target aircraft at .8
Mach, we have a Delta Mach of .4. Applying this to the formula, we see that
minimum range is equal to 3000 + (.4 × 3000), or 4200 feet. The general
“rule-of-thumb” for minimum range, co-airspeed, co-altitude, however,
is 3000 feet. Maximum Range: Maximum range is determined by three
factors – guidance time, air density, and Delta Mach. Missile guidance time
is approximately 18 seconds, which is a constant value applied to both air
density and Delta Mach. Air density is important factor, in that the higher
the air density the greater the aerodynamic drag, thus the shorter the range
over an 18-second time period. Delta Mach is important in that the faster
the launch aircraft, the faster the missile in relation to the target; thus, over
an 18-second time period, the greater the distance the missile will travel.
Many max-range charts have been developed by both the Air Force and
the Navy to depict the maximum range at various altitudes, airspeeds, and
Delta Mach relationships; however, it is virtually impossible to remember
all these relationships.
The following “rules-of-thumb” may be used by the pilot to determine
max range:
(1) For co-speed attacks against trans-sonic bombers – one mile for
altitudes below 10,000 feet, add one-half mile range for each additional
10,000 feet increase in altitude.

4

(2) For co-speed attacks against supersonic targets – one mile range
for altitudes below 20,000 feet and add one-half mile for each additional
10,000-foot increase in altitude. In applying the rules-of-thumb we can
see that Sidewinder’s max-effective range against a sub-sonic target at
30,000 feet would be two miles, or, roughly 10,000 feet slant range. Against
a supersonic target at 30,000 feet, the maximum slant range would be
approximately one and one-half mile, or, roughly 7800 feet.
(3) Delta Mach “rule-of-thumb”: Add one thousand feet for each .1
Delta Mach when above 30,000 feet altitude. To illustrate: A .8 Mach target,
at 30,000 feet, is being attacked by a 1.2-Mach fighter at the same altitude.
Applying the sub-sonic rule-of-thumb, we find that the max-effective range
at which we can launch the missile is 10,000 feet, or approximately 2 miles,
for a co-speed condition. Adding 4000 feet for .4 Delta Mach, we compute
a new max-effective range of 14,000 feet.
The only problem now is range estimation. When in the cockpit of
an attacking fighter, at minimum ranges, there is no problem, since we
may use the ASG-17 radar to determine range. At max range, however,
we are beyond the capability of the radar and must use another means
of determining our approximate range from a given target. For normal
missile firing ranges, fairly accurate range estimation can be accomplished
by comparing a known aircraft wingspan with the sight reticle radius, or
with pipper diameter. Applying the formula,
X=

WS × 1000
S

Where
X = size of the target in mils
WS= wingspan of the target in feet
S = range of the attacking fighter from the target
we can determine the size of the target, in relation to the 70-mil-diameter
reticle or 2-mil pipper.
Example 1:
Size of Badger (wingspan 116’) in mils when range is 10,000’
X=

116 × 1000
= 11.6 or approximately 12 mils
10,000

This means that at 10,000 feet, the Badger wingspan will subtend 1 ∕ 3 of
reticle radius (35 mils). At 20,000 feet the Badger span will be 6 mils and
will subtend 3 pipper widths. At 5,000 feet the Badger span will be 23 mils
and will subtend 2 ∕ 3 of a reticle radius.

5

Example 2
Size of F-100 (wingspan 39’) in mils when range is 10,000 feet
39 × 1000
= 3.9 or approximately 4 mils
10,000
At 10,000 feet the F-100 wingspan will subtend 2 pipper widths. At 20,000
feet it will subtend 1 pipper width, and at 5000 feet, 4 pipper widths or
approximately 1 ∕ 5 of radius.
X=

G
AIM-9B can pull approximately 10G at sea level and approximately
3.5 G at 50,000 feet. The 10G maximum at sea level extends almost
all the way to 30,000 feet. From that altitude upward, the capability
decreases until, at 50,000 feet the missile can pull approximately 3.5 G. In
other words, Sidewinder can pull 10G from sea level to 30,000 feet and
approximately 3.5 G at 50,000 feet. Maximum fighter G, when launching,
is approximately 2G below 40,000 feet and 1.6 G above 40,000 feet. The
G-capability of the missile determines the G-limit on the fighter at launch.
To illustrate: The rate of turn of the fighter in a pursuit curve is dependent
on target speed, angle off, and range, as indicated by the following formula:
Vt × Sin θ
W=
Range
Where
W = Rate of turn in radians per second
Vt = Target velocity in feet per second
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off
By examining the formula we can see that the rate of turn (W) increases
any time target velocity or angle-off increases, and decreases as range
increases. The number of G which the fighter pulls, at a given rate of turn,
is directly proportional to fighter speed, and may be represented by the
following formula:
W=

32.2 × N
Vf

Where
N = Number of radial G
Vf = Fighter velocity in feet per second
W = Rate of turn in radians per second
We can see from the formula that any time fighter velocity increases, we
must also increase G (N), in an effort to maintain a given turn rate.
Rate of turn required for the missile to set up a collision course is
dependent upon five factors: (1) target speed, (2) angle-off,
6

(3) range, (4) enabling time, and, (5) the navigational constant. The
number of G which the missile pulls, for a given rate of turn, is directly
proportional to missile speed. The higher the speed, the higher the G.
If the missile is launched from a Mach 1 fighter pulling 2G, how many
G must the missile pull in order to maintain the same rate of turn as the
launching fighter? As shown by the formula
Vf × W
32.2
since the missile (V) is going 1.7 Mach above the launch aircraft’s velocity,
or 2.7 Mach, it must pull 5.4 G, in order to maintain the same rate of turn
as the launching fighter. Why, then, are we committed to pull a maximum
of 2G when the missile can pull 10G, an amount considerably greater than
the 5.4 G which we just computed? AIM-9B does not begin to guide until
1 ∕ 2 second after launch, at which time it receives its first guidance signal
to set up a collision course. During this enabling period (1 ∕ 2 second) the
missile has the characteristics of an ordinary rocket. Because of this, an
additional rate of turn is necessary to set up its collision course. To set up
the collision course, Sidewinder turns 3 1 ∕ 2 times the rate of turn of the
gyro-seeker – this is a navigational constant. Because of this, the rate of
turn generated by the missile, in the first maneuver, is greater than the
rate of turn of the launching fighter. Since the number of G pulled by the
missile and fighter is equated to rate of turn and velocity, it is obvious that
the 2G limitation of the fighter at launch is tied to the 10G limitation of the
missile. If more than 2G is pulled, the tracking rate of the gyro-seeker is
exceeded by the line-of-sight rate, thus the seeker loses the target.
N=

Another means of exceeding the tracking rate of the gyro-seeker is
to launch the missile with an angle-of-attack in excess of 12° (the angle
between the missile’s longitudinal axis and the launch aircraft’s flight
path). For the F-100, since the missile launcher line is aligned 2° below
the fuselage reference line, the maximum aircraft angle of attack is 14°. If
launched with a greater angle of attack, Sidewinder will jump toward flight
path, causing the tracking rate of the gyro-seeker to be exceeded by the
line-of-sight rate, consequently the gyro-seeker will lose the target. When
this happens, the missile goes ballistic. To avoid exceeding a 14° angle
of attack, the F-100 should not be flown at less than 170 knots in a 1G
condition and 230 knots in a 2G condition.
Lambda
Lambda limit is simply the max look-angle between the axis of the
gyro-seeker and the longitudinal axis of the missile – a 25-degree cone
with its center along the longitudinal axis of the missile. Why are we
interested in this lambda limitation? It is possible for a pilot to satisfy the
conditions of IR, range, and G, yet be outside the lambda capability of the
missile. Lambda limit may be exceeded by a combination of two factors:
low missile velocity and high angle-off.
7

(1) Low Missile Velocity: One-half second after launch, Sidewinder
turns to establish a collision course with the target. Two seconds after
launch, it has a velocity 1.7 Mach greater than that of the launch aircraft.
To establish a collision course, Sidewinder turns 3 1 ∕ 2 times the rate of
the gyro-seeker axis to reduce the line of sight rate to zero, or establish
a constant angular relationship between the missile and the target. After
rocket motor burn-out, the missile begins to slow down. In order to
maintain a collision course after deceleration, the gyro-seeker must look
farther and farther to the side as it nears the target. In other words, as
illustrated by figures 1 and 2, as the missile slows down, the lambda angle
increases until collision occurs.

FAST MISSILE
Figure 1

SLOW MISSILE
Figure 2
8

(2) High Angle-Off, the other basic cause of lambda-limiting is
understood by considering a missile which, immediately upon launching,
could turn onto the collision course. The line-of-sight angle would remain
constant and the gyro-seeker would thus remain with its axis along the
initial pursuit heading. It can be seen in figures 3 and 4 that the collision
course for launching well off the tail differs in direction from the initial
heading much more than does the collision course for launching slightly
off the tail.

LARGE INITIAL ANGLE OFF
Figure 3

SMALL INITIAL ANGLE OFF
Figure 4

9

Consequently, the higher the angle-off, the greater the lambda angle. At
long range (within max missile range) lambda limitation occurs at smaller
angles-off, because of the effect of lambda-limitation on decreasing missile
velocity. At short range, lambda limitation is caused by the sharp turn
which the missile must perform. You will recall that if an attacker fires
with any appreciable angle-off at short range, he will be very near his 2G
limitation, or near the 10G limitation of the missile itself. This means that
the missile is turning sharply to set up its collision course. The sharper the
turn, the higher the missile angle of attack. As shown in figure 5, the angle
of attack adds to the lambda angle so that lambda limit is reached. When
lambda limit is exceeded, the gyro-seeker bumps against a mechanical stop,
slows the gyro to a halt and the missile goes ballistic. Since we have no
instrumentation available to measure lambda limit, we provide an artificial
means to represent this lambda limitation – do not fire at angles-off greater
than 30°. At 40,000 feet and above,

SHORT RANGE LAMBDA LIMITATION
Figure 5

10

do not exceed 10° angle-off – this is primarily because of servo-bias (poor
burning of powder). This will preclude the possibility of an attacking pilot
exceeding the lambda limitation of his missile.
In order to kill with Sidewinder, you must be within the firing
envelope as defined by the infrared, range, G and lambda limitations. If a
pilot exceeds any one of these limits, kill-probability drops drastically. For
practical purposes, we can define the missile firing envelope as a 60° cone
emanating from the tail of the target aircraft, with its length dependent
upon altitude and rate of closure (Delta Mach). For future use, we will
describe this cone as an angular velocity cone or a cone of maximum
performance.
MECHANICS OF THE PURSUIT CURVE
To fully comprehend the limitations of our weapons system, so that
we may develop effective tactics, we need to know something of the nature
of the attack in which we will be employing Sidewinder – the pursuit curve
attack. A pursuit curve attack is basically an attack in which the flight
path of the attacking fighter is continuously pointed at a moving target.
To provide an insight into this type of attack, we will employ the following
formula.
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ
32.2 N

Where
S = Range
Vf = Fighter velocity in feet per second
Vt = Target velocity in feet per second
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off of the attacking fighter
N = Number of radial Gs pulled by the attacker
With the above formula, we can compute the range for a given G and
angle-off for any combination of target and fighter speeds. It should be
noted however, that the formula does not consider lead for target motion,
nor does it represent the flight path of the attacking aircraft. Instead it
represents distance/bearing relationships for a given set of values at a
specific point in space.
Despite the above limitations , the formula is still valid, in that it provides
an insight into the problems associated with the pursuit curve. Study of the
formula reveals:
1. The area of vulnerability is a narrow cone emanating from the tail
of the target aircraft. This can be amply illustrated in the formula above by
analyzing figure 6.
11

For fighter and target at 35,000’,
Vf = 1.2M = 693 KTAS = 1,170’ ∕ second
Vt = .8M = 463 KTAS = 782’ ∕ second
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 28, 450 × Sin θ
=
32.2 N
N

For N = 3, S = 9,480 Sinθ
θ
15°
20°
25°
30°

For N = 3.5, S = 8,130 Sinθ

S
2,460’
3,240
4,010’
4,740’

θ
15°
20°
25°
30°

S
2,110’
2,780’
3,440’
4,060’

Figure 6
As shown in figure 6, the cone becomes narrower at firing ranges if the fighter
velocity and/or target velocity is increased. In other words, the attacking fighter will
be forced to fire at smaller angles-off if he does not wish to increase his firing range.
Reducing angle-off against bomber-type targets places the attacking fighter in the
bomber’s effective cone of fire. Therefore, if the velocities of the target and fighter
increase, and we do not reduce angle-off, the range must, of necessity, increase. The
increase in range will be in proportion to the velocity increase of the fighter or the
target. If both target and fighter velocities are increased, the increase in range will
be a multiple of the increases of the fighter and target velocities (for example – if Vf
and Vt are doubled, the range will be quadrupled).
2. The cone becomes narrower with an increase in altitude (the formula is
a function of fighter velocity, G, and angle-off). It is a recognized fact that the
available G of the fighter decreases with an increase in altitude and, as shown in the
formula, any such decrease in G will be accompanied by an increase in range.
In a curve of pursuit, the rate of turn necessary to track a given target is
determined by range, angle-off and target velocity. This rate of turn may be
expressed by the following formula:
W=

Vt × Sin θ
Range

Where
W = Radians per second
Vt = Target velocity in feet per second
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off
12

On the basis of the formula, if angle-off diminishes more rapidly than the
range, the rate of turn will decrease (this will occur in some part of the
pursuit curve when the fighter velocity is less than twice the velocity of the
target). If range diminishes more rapidly than angle-off, throughout the
curve, the rate of turn or G will increase (this will occur when the fighter
velocity is more than twice as great as the velocity of the target). To find
the parts of the curve where we will achieve these increases or decreases in
rates of turn, we can use the following formula:
CoSin of the angle-off where maximum G occurs =

Vf
2 × Vt

Where
Vf = Fighter velocity
Vt = Target velocity
NOTE: These two velocities may be expressed in knots, miles per hour,
feet per second, or any other appropriate unit, as long as Vf and Vt are
expressed in like values.
This formula will enable us to determine the point on the pursuit
curve where maximum G will be encountered. For example: If we have
a fighter with a velocity of 1.2 Mach attacking a target with a velocity of
.8 Mach, the point of max-G will be about 41.4° angle-off. Therefore, in
effect, we are saying that at angles greater than 41.4°, the rate of turn (or
G) is increasing. At angles of less than 41.4° the rate of turn is decreasing.
To further illustrate – if we have a fighter traveling at twice or greater than
twice the speed of the tar­get, the max-G point will occur at zero-degrees
angle-off. In other words, there will be a G build-up or an increase in the
rate of turn throughout the entire pass.
In pursuit attacks with today’s fighter-bomber velocities, a fighter is
forced to fire under conditions where its velocity is less than twice that
of the target. In this type of attack, the fighter is not only forced to fire
at longer ranges, but also to fire where his rate of turn is decreasing. We
can see from studying figure 7 that the attacker’s rate of turn is not only
decreasing, but it is decreasing at an increasing rate. In other words, the
attacker is being “sucked” or forced in-trail. As illustrated in figure 7, the
attacker loses .19 G/sec at 30° angle-off. At 25° angle-off he loses .27 G ∕ sec
and so on until at 10° angle-off he loses .45 G ∕ sec.

13

For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = 1.2M
Vt = .8M
Angle of Max-G = 41.4°
Nr = 4 @ 41.4°

θ
41.4°
30°
25°
20°
15°
10°

N
4
3.83
3.64
3.36
2.97
2.49

Ń
0
.19
.27
.35
.41
.46

S
4620
3660
3260
2850
2440
1960

Figure 7

If the attacker decreases his G at the max-G point (with the same
fighter velocities as shown is figure 8, he will be able to diminish his rate of
G bleed-off. However, this will force him to fire at longer ranges. Naturally
an attacker does not want to do this, because, as range increases, his bullet
density decreases by a function of the square (if range doubles, bullet
density quarters). As a result, an attacker must fire over a longer time span
to deliver a lethal burst. At the same time, he must track a target smaller in
perspective. Under these conditions, it becomes quite difficult to deliver an
effective burst.
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = 1.2 Mach
Vt = .9 Mach
Angle of Max-G = 41.4°
Nr = 3 @ 41.4°

14

θ
41.4°
30°
25°
20°
15°
10°

N
3
2.88
2.74
2.53
2.23
1.87

Ń
0
.11
.16
.20
.23
.26

S
6180
4870
4330
3790
3250
2600

Figure 8

If the attacker increases his G at the Max-G point, as shown in figure
9, he will be able to fire at shorter ranges. However, if he does this, his G
bleed-off will become even more rapid than originally shown.
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = 1.2 Mach
Vt = .8 Mach
Angle of Max G = 41.4°
Nr = 5 @ 41.1°
Ń = Rate of change G ∕ sec 2

θ
41.4°
30°
25°
20°
15°
10°

N
5
4.80
4.56
4.21
3.72
3.12

Ń
0
.30
.43
.55
.63
.72
Figure 9

15

S
3710
2920
2600
2280
1950
1560

LIMITATIONS OF OUR WEAPONS SYSTEM IN A PURSUIT CURVE
ATTACK
To accurately predict the lead requirement (prediction angle) any
sight requires the following basic information: range and target angular
velocity. In the disturbed sight, range is provided by the ranging radar
and target angular velocity information is acquired by tracking the target
aircraft. Since the pilot is forced to turn his aircraft at a certain rate, this
rate of turn is a representation of target motion and is directly proportional
to target speed. The angular velocity of the attacking aircraft is fed into the
sight through gyro action. This information is then married to the input
from the radar and the proper prediction angle is computed by placing an
electrical restraint (stiffness current) on the gyros. At long ranges, little
restraint is applied, while at short ranges, great restraint is applied. In other
words, the disturbed sight is directly tied to the responses of the pilot and
to the dynamics of the aircraft when computing for target motion.
In an attack where the fighter velocity is less than twice that of the
target, the following occurs:
1. The rate of turn necessary to track the target diminishes as the
range decreases.
2. The stiffness current to the gyros in the sight increases as the range
decreases.
Because of these two conditions, a pilot closing for the attack experiences
a sensation that the pipper is drifting in front of the target. To correct
for this, he relaxes back-pressure to reduce his turn rate. This, in turn,
creates a lower rate input to the sight gyros, which causes the pipper
to be repositioned to match the new turn rate. So, once again, the pilot
must change is turn rate to reposition his tracking index, which again
repositions his pipper and so on. Yet, for the attacker to have the proper
prediction angle, he must continually make these corrections and also tract
the target one-half to two-thirds the time of flight of the bullet, to allow for
sight solution time. As we can see, a pilot may nullify this effect of chasing
the pipper by firing at lower G. However, if he does, he will be forced to fire
at longer range. His sight will have even less restraint and his target will be
smaller in perspective. If he fires at higher G (shorter range) his sight will
have more restraint, but the prediction angle will continuously change in
greater magnitude. As a result, the attacker has very little choice as to the
type of pass he may execute. He is forced into a narrow attack cone to avoid
either extreme.
To solve this problem of G bleed-off, we must refer back to the
mechanics of the pursuit curve. You will recall that if an attacker’s

16

velocity is twice or more than twice that of a target, there will be an
increase in rate of turn. In attacks of this nature, a different situation exist.
1. The rate of turn necessary to track a target increases as the range
decreases.
2. The stiffness current to the sight gyros increases as the rate
decreases.
In an attack where these conditions exist, the pipper tends to remain on the
target because the forward drift of the pipper is cancelled by the demand
for greater G as range diminishes. In this attack, as the prediction angle
is changing less in magnitude, the pilot has a more stable tracking index,
and consequently, is more able to track for the required time to achieve
sight solution. Naturally, this would be the ideal attack for us to perform;
however, this is impossible, because the disproportionate increase in
fighter and target velocities has not only pushed the firing range out, but
has also created conditions where the sight prediction angle is continuously
changing in considerable magnitude. These conditions seriously impair
our ability to destroy a non-maneuvering target with a gun attack.
AIM-9B Missile
Sidewinder is not affected by the limitations of a computing sight
because, in a missile attack, the pilot uses a 70-mil tracking cone with a
fixed sight. This allows him to track the target quite successfully. The G
bleed-off characteristics of today’s pursuit attacks actually help the attacker
to position himself within the 60° launch cone behind the target aircraft,
since the attacker is being forced into the trail position – behind his
respective target – with a G bleed-off.
TYPES OF PURSUIT CURVE ATTACKS
Until now, we have made a general analysis of the type of attack we
will be performing against high-speed targets. Now, we will discuss specific
types of pursuit curve attacks and see if one or more of these attacks offers
advantages over the others. There are four basic types of pursuit attack:
1. The High-side or Level Attack
2. The Overhead Attack
3. The underside Attack
4. The Nose-quarter Attack

17

The