CHAPTER I
BASIC LIMITATIONS OF AIM-9B AGAINST A MANEUVERING
TARGET
In discussing the employment of AIM-9B against a non-maneuvering
target, we indicated that the missile has four basic limitations – IR,
range, G, and lambda – and that these limitations forced us to deliver the
missile in a cone 60° wide, emanating from the tail of the target aircraft.
It was also shown that the length of this cone would vary according to
altitude and delta Mach. At high altitude, with a positive delta Mach, the
cone (envelope) will be considerably longer than at low altitude. In our
discussion of fighter-versus-bomber tactics, we defined this cone in terms
of angular velocity (max performance cone). By angular velocity cone,
we mean an envelope in which the attacking fighter may deliver AIM-9B
without exceeding its maneuvering limitations. We can see, by applying
this angular velocity cone to any fighter-versus-bomber or fighter-versusfighter situation, that the purpose of any tactics which we develop will be
to place us in this cone. On the other hand, when in a defensive situation,
we will attempt to rotate this cone away from a given opponent. By doing
this, we prevent him from securing a firing position.
When employing AIM-9B against a maneuvering target, the cone
not only diminishes in size, it also changes in shape. In other words,
the geometric shape of the maneuvering envelope will be considerably
different than a non-maneuvering envelope. To illustrate: When discussing
the non-maneuvering envelope, we found that its basic shape was
determine by four factors – IR, range, G and lambda. We noted that these
envelopes were rather symmetrical in shape. Maneuvering envelopes, on
the other hand, are not so symmetrical. The lambda and G-limitations
are primarily responsible for this change in shape. The reason for this:
Lambda limitation may be exceeded because of a combination of low
missile velocity and high angle off. If we launch AIM-9B from long range
– within the effective range of the missile – at a maneuvering target, we
can expect the target to turn into the attack. His objective is, of course to
rotate his angular velocity cone away from the launch aircraft. By doing
this, the defender can force the missile to exceed its lambda limit, because
the missile is not only slowing down as it approaches the target, but the
angle-off is increasing, since the defender is turning into the missile’s line
of flight. In other words, the angular velocity generated by the defender
forces AIM-9B to turn farther and farther in front of the target to maintain
its collision course. This, of course, increases the resultant lambda angle.
In addition, the missile is forced to turn even farther in front of the target,
because of its continuous decrease in velocity after rocket motor burn-out,
producing an extremely large lambda angle. If AIM-9B is launched near its
max-effective range and the target turns into the attack, the combination of
increasing angle-off and missile deceleration can easily cause the missile to
exceed its lambda limitation. If
42

this occurs, the gyro seeker rubs against its mechanical stops, which stops
the gyro and the missile loses guidance.
The attacker can do two things to avoid exceeding lambda limitation:
(1) reduce his range before launch, which results in a higher missile
velocity in relation to the target, and therefore, a smaller resultant lambda
angle, and (2) reduce angle off. The smaller the angle off, the lower the
resulting lambda angle. It is now obvious that the best attack can be
initiated from the six-o’clock position at a reduced range. It is also obvious
that lambda is the greatest missile limitation against a maneuvering target.
To illustrate the magnitude of this limitation, let’s examine figure 18 and
19.

Figure 18

43

Figure 19

When AIM-9B is launch from a .8 Mach attacker against a .8 Mach
maneuvering target which is performing a 3-G turn into the attack, we
note (from figure 18) that effective missile range is somewhat less than that
available against a non-maneuvering target. We also note that max angle
off from which Aim-9B may be launched is less than 20°. The reduction in
range is necessary because of the 25° lambda limit, while the reduced angle
off is caused by a combination of lambda and G-limitations (G-limitations
will be discussed later). If the target pulls more than 3 G, the maneuvering
envelope will become even smaller.

44

At 6G, there will be no point from which the attacker can fire the missile
and achieve a kill. In other words, there will be no maneuvering envelope
at all. If AIM-9B is launched from a Mach-1 attacker against a Mach-1
target, at 35,000 feet, we note the following: When the target performs a
3-G turn into the attack, at missile launch, the attacker must reduce his
range by approximately one-third when firing from a six-o’clock position
(see figure 19). If the attacker launches at 30° angle-off, he must reduce
his range by approximately one-half – as compared to a non-maneuvering
target – if he expect to get a kill. Once again, the reason for this reduction
in range is lambda limitation. The attacker must reduce his range, by
a greater magnitude, at 30° angle-off because missile lambda angle is
increase by both high angle-off and increased range. When the angle off
is increased, range must be reduced to preclude exceeding lambda limit,
hence the difference in range reduction between a zero-degree angle off
and a high-angle-off shot against a maneuvering target. Once again, if the
target increases G, the maneuvering envelope diminishes in size. At 6-G,
there will be no maneuvering envelope, therefore, the attacker cannot
achieve a successful launch and kill against a target pulling 6-G.
In our discussion of the above envelopes, we assume that there has
been no diminution of target speed in any of his maneuvers. If speed decay
occurs, the attack conditions will change and the attack will no longer
be co-speed. As a result, missile velocity will be higher in relation to the
target, and the resultant lambda angle will be smaller, since velocity varies
inversely with lambda angle (at a given range and angle-off). This means
that if the attacker has a positive delta Mach, rather than a co-speed
relationship, he can launch at a greater range without exceeding lambda
limitation. On the other hand, if the attacker is forced to launch against
a maneuvering target which is traveling faster than the attacker, missile
velocity, in relation to the target, is smaller. Result: The attacker must
launch at a shorter range to preclude lambda limitation.
In view of the above relationships, we can see that the best attack is
one in which the attacker has a positive delta Mach and a low angle-off
on his initial approach to the target. This will provide greater freedom of
maneuver and the opportunity to launch at longer ranges. On the other
hand, the worst possible attack is one in which the attacker has a negative
delta Mach and a high angle-off. This will restrict his freedom of maneuver
and force him into a position from which the target can easily defend
against this attack.
If AIM-9B is launched from an attack executed in the vertical plane
overhead or underside attack – the maneuvering target will be forced to
turn into the attack. Once again, by turning into the plane of the attack, the
target will generate max angular velocity and force the missile to operate
near its limiting parameters. In an overhead attack, this means that the
attacker will not only be concerned with

45

lambda limitation, but also with the same limitations encountered in an
attack against a non-maneuvering target – IR and G. These limitations
force the attacker to diminish his range until he can discriminate between
IR background clutter and target signal and/or avoid exceeding the
lambda limitation. This means that in a .9 Mach co-speed attack against a
maneuvering target, the attacker will be forced to fire at less than 20° angleoff, otherwise, he will exceed his 2G limitation (see figure 20). Remember,
in an overhead attack, the difference between total and radial G is
considerably less than in the high-side or the underside attack (Gt = Gr +
Cosθ), therefore, to stay within the 2G limitation, the attacker must launch
from longer ranges (at a given angle-off). For example, if an attacker
performs an overhead .9-Mach co-speed attack – to prevent himself from
exceeding the 2G launch limitation at 30° angle-off – he must launch from
a range of at least 10,450 feet. Under the same conditions, he can launch
from a range of 6,840 feet at 30° angle-off in a high-side or level attack. In
an underside attack, he can launch as near as 4,130 feet at 30° angle-off and
still be within the 2G launch limitation.
From the above analysis, it is apparent that the overhead attack is the
worst possible because of the limitations imposed by IR, G and lambda.
Unlike an overhead attack against a non-maneuvering target, the attacker
will find it difficult to acquire the low angle-off necessary for launch.
Instead, since the target is turning into the attack, the angle-off will
increase and the opportunity to launch will be lost. On the other hand,
there is a slight advantage since the target is forced to turn into the attack –
he will be forced to pull up and will consequently experience speed decay.
The attacker will have a positive delta Mach and a higher missile velocity
in relation to the target, and, therefore, a greater range from which he can
launch AIM-9B before lambda limit is reached. This advantage is not a
real advantage however, because the attacker can still be forced to exceed
the IR and G parameters. We know, from our study of AIM-9B, that if we
force the missile to exceed any one of the four parameters – IR, range, G
or lambda – a kill will be unlikely. From a tactics standpoint, while on the
defensive, the attack most easy to defend against is an overhead attack with
a negative delta Mach. In this situation, we force the attacker to exceed a
greater number of his limiting parameters than in any other attack.
The underside, or six-o’clock-low attack is the best possible attack
which we can execute against a maneuvering target. It was noted in our
analysis of this attack against a non-maneuvering target that we acquired
advantage in IR, G, surprise, and performance. When attacking a
maneuvering target, we retain these advantages, but acquire a disadvantage
from lambda limitation. The lambda disadvantage is however, overridden
by the advantages. This is true because the advantages of IR and G allow
the attacker to launch at relatively shorter ranges at high angles-off,
without exceeding the 2G launch

46

Figure 20

47

limitation. (Remember, in an underside attack, radial G is greater than
total G.) In other words, the attacker receives the benefit of 1G gravity, thus
allowing him to position himself closer to the target at a higher angle-off
without exceeding his 2G limitation (total G). This means that the attacker
can reduce his range to stay within the lambda limitation and still be
within his 2G launch limitation. In effect, the attacker is provided greater
freedom of maneuver to successfully launch AIM-9B. In an underside
attack, this freedom of maneuver is greater than in any other attack.
From the defender’s viewpoint, it is certainly the most difficult attack to
defend against. In summary we may say: The best attack for AIM-9B is the
underside attack and the worst attack is the overhead attack – especially if
the attacker has a negative delta Mach.

48