Defending Four when Attacked by Four

144

Procedures for Defending Four when Attacked by Two

144

Procedures for Defending Four when Attacked by Four

146

Summary – Fighter vs Fighter

146

Bibliography

147

STATEMENT OF REVIEW
1. In accordance with AFR 5-5 and in compliance with AFR 5-5/Wing
Supplement-1, Nellis Air Force Base, dated 21 March 1960, this publication
has been thoroughly reviewed by the undersigned officers, and:
a. Is considered essential for the following reasons:
(1) It satisfies a Tactical Air Command need for GAR-8 employment
information.
(2) It provides a complete and authoritative analysis of Aerial Studies for use by
all fighter units with TAC.
(3) It will be used as a reference work in support of Course No. 1115053, and
by units undergoing training in the Academic Section of the USAF Fighter
Weapons School.
b. It has been determined to be an original work which does not duplicate
any similar publication.
c. It does not contain any matter which might be considered objectionable or
subject to ridicule.
d. No further coordination is deemed necessary.

Introduction
Tactics – fighter-versus-bomber, fighter-versus-fighter, or even ground
attack – are developed according to the performance capabilities or
limitations of the weapons or weapons systems used. In other words,
effective tactics reflect the best way to employ a given weapon against
a given enemy with known or estimated capabilities. Assuming this to
be true, tactics are functional – that is, they reflect the capabilities and
limitations of the opponent’s weapons as well as our own. Therefore, in
our discussion of aerial attack, we must determine the operation envelopes
of our weapons systems (this includes the aircraft and its associated
armament). After having learned these envelope parameters, the discussion
will center on how to best employer weapons systems in a given fighterversus-fighter or fighter-versus-bomber situation, in which we assume that
our opponent has comparable capabilities.
Fighter-versus-bomber tactics will be covered first. In this phase, we
assume that a maneuvering fighter attacks a non-maneuvering target;
whereas in the fighter-versus-fighter phase, we assume that a maneuvering
fighter attacks a maneuvering target. Since the fighter-versus-bomber
situation has only one variable – the maneuvering fighter – a more exact
technical analysis can be accomplished on it. In addition, fighter-versusbomber theory is a fundamental departure point for fighter-versus-fighter
combat.

BASIC LIMITATIONS OF THE DISTURBED SIGHT AND THE 20MM
CANNON
To adequately employ the disturbed sight and the 20mm cannon, we
must understand the limitations of this equipment in any tactical situation.
The operating range of the ASG-17 disturbed sight is from 600
to 6000 feet. It will compute the proper prediction angle for a target
throughout that range, from the ground up to 50,000 feet and from zero to
nine G, if the pilot can track the target properly. However, it is improbable
that a pilot would be able to deliver a lethal burst of fire at a range greater
than 3,000 feet because of the difficulty in tracking beyond that range.
To accurately predict the lead requirement, any disturbed sight
requires the following basic information: range and target angular velocity.
In the disturbed sight, range is provided by the ranging radar, and target
angular velocity information is acquired by tracking the target aircraft.
Since the pilot is forced to turn his aircraft at a certain rate, this rate of
turn is a representation of target motion and is directly proportional to
target speed. The angular velocity of the attacking aircraft is set into the
sight through gyro action. The information is then married to the input
from the radar and the proper prediction angle is computed by placing
an electrical restraint (stiffness current) on the gyros. At long ranges,
little restraint is applied, while at short ranges a great amount of restraint
is applied. At ranges beyond 3,000 feet, little restraint is applied, thus
producing a tracking index which is quite loose and difficult to control.
Since the pilot’s responses are not precise enough, results are usually poor,
even though the equipment may be working properly.
Another limitation is the cone of dispersion of the 20mm cannon.
For the M-39, harmonization criteria specifies that 80% of all rounds fired
must impact in a 4-mil cone. As we increase firing range, bullet density will
be decreased by a function of the square (if range doubles, bullet density
quarters). At 3,000 feet, bullet density will be decreased to 1 ∕ 9 that at 1,000
feet. As a result, an attacker must fire over a longer time span in order to
deliver a lethal burst. At the same time, he must track a target smaller in
perspective. Since it is extremely difficult to track with the disturbed sight
at ranges greater than 3,000 feet, and the 20mm cone of dispersion causes
loss of effective bullet density at this range, we consider our maximum
range for the disturbed sight/20mm cannon as 3,000 feet.
BASIC LIMITATIONS OF THE AIM-9B (GAR-8) MISSILE AGAINST A
NON-MANEUVERING TARGET
AIM-9B is a supersonic infra-red-homing missile, launched in the
target’s tail cone on a pursuit course, using the fixed sight. After launch, the
missile maneuvers to establish a collision course with

1

the target. In other words, the missile determines where the target is going
and heads for that point in space. To successfully employ Sidewinder in a
given tactical situation, you must be within its firing envelope. This firing
envelope is determined by: (1) The radiation pattern of the target and
(2) The performance envelope of the missile. The radiation pattern of a
particular target is the area in which you can detect its IR radiation. The
performance envelope is determined by: Range of the missile, number of
G which the missile can pull and lambda (look -angle) limitations. Thus,
the basic limitations of the missile, against a non-maneuvering target are
determined by: Infra-red pattern, range, G and lambda. Since tactics are
developed according to the performance capabilities or limitations of the
weapons used, discussion of the limitations is in order.
IR Pattern
The missile gyro-seeker locks onto the strongest point-source of
IR radiation. For a target in military power, the strongest point-source
is the hot metal of the jet’s tailpipe. Approximately 85% of the IR signal
generated comes from this hot metal and the remaining 15% comes from
the hot jet exhaust. For a target operating in afterburner, the primary
source of radiation is the hot exhaust flame. Approximately 60% of the
signal generated comes from flame and 40% is generated by the hot metal
of the tailpipe. In the discussion of radiation patterns, it is necessary to
keep in mind the shape of the pattern. In aircraft with shielded tailpipes,
radiation patterns are generally long and relatively narrow; whereas, in
aircraft which do not have shielded tailpipes, the patterns are long and
wide. In fighter -type aircraft, the radiation pattern is generally long and
relatively narrow since the geometry of the aircraft shields the tailpipe. This
applies in military power only. In afterburner power, naturally, the pattern
is long and wide, since the flame of the afterburner is not shielded by the
jet’s aft fuselage. In both English and Soviet bomber-type airplanes, in the
horizontal plane, the jet tailpipe is shielded by the sweep-back of the wings,
thus presenting a long narrow pattern. In the vertical plane, however, the
pattern is long and wide, since the wings do not shield the hot metal and
the jet exhaust. USAF bomber-type aircraft, on the other hand, present
long and wide horizontal patterns, since the engine nacelles are suspended
below the wing, providing the gyro-seeker a relatively unrestricted view
of the jet exhaust. In the overhead vertical plane, the pattern is long and
narrow, since the wing shields the IR radiation from the gyro-seeker.
Radiation patterns vary with tailpipe temperature as well as with area of
the source. In other words, the greater the temperature, the greater the
radiation pattern; and, logically, the larger the source, the greater the
radiation pattern. To illustrate: A bomber with 8 engines in military power,
as compared to a fighter with one engine in military power, would generate
a much larger radiation pattern because the area of the source is much
greater.

2

Background IR sources are significant factors affecting the size and
shape of radiation patterns. Important background IR sources are (1) Sun,
(2) Clouds, (3) Water, (4) Snow and (5) Terrain.
(1) Sun: The sun is the strongest source of infra-red energy known.
You cannot fire Sidewinder at targets flying directly between you and the
sun, since the sun’s radiation will decoy the missile away from the target.
Therefore, do not fire at a target which is within 25° of the sun. Also, do
not continuously point the missile directly at the sun for more than ten
seconds, or the lead sulphide detector may be permanently damaged.
(2) Clouds: Clouds reflect IR radiation from the sun – particularly
cumulus clouds. If you must fire at a target which is framed against a bright
cloud background, in all probability you will be forced to reduce your slant
range to 6,000 or 8,000 feet (AFMDC ADJ SS-845) to obtain proper signal
discrimination. If the target is hidden by clouds, the clouds will confuse the
target signal so that the missile will not home. The signal which you receive
will be the background radiation reflected by the clouds. A good ruleof-thumb for flying in clouds or against a cloud background is: diminish
range until it is possible to discriminate between the background and the
target signal.
(3) Water: Water, like clouds, reflects IR energy from the sun. Calm
water is a tremendous background radiator when the sun’s images can
actually be seen in the water. Rough or choppy water, on the other hand,
reflects IR radiation in all directions and the attacker need not be in a
position where he can see the image of the sun on the water. As when
operating against a cloud background, diminish range until you can
achieve proper signal discrimination.
(4) Snow: Snow, like water and clouds, reflects the sun’s IR energy.
When firing against a snow background, as compared to a water or cloud
background, you will have to diminish your slant range much more in
order to get proper signal discrimination. There is a good possibility that
you will be forced inside the missile’s minimum range, thereby precluding
a missile attack.
(5) Terrain: Terrain background reduces maximum missile range,
as do clouds and other previously mentioned backgrounds. Light
terrain in particular, such as dry lakes and sand, provides maximum
background radiation. When firing against the three previously mentioned
backgrounds, under an overcast, max range is not diminished nearly as
much as when firing under CAVU conditions, since the clouds act as a
device for shielding out the sun’s IR radiation.

3

Range:
AIM-9B has both minimum and maximum range restrictions. Basic
minimum range for launching is 3,000 feet. This is determined by three
factors: (1) Time for the influence fuze to arm, (2) Time for the missile to
set up a collision course, and (3) Delta Mach. To be assured of a kill, all
three of these factors must be considered. First, time for the influence fuze
to arm: It has been proven through empirical testing, that approximately
85% of the kills achieved have been through influence fuze action. Since
it takes the influence fuze about two seconds to arm – at rocket motor
burn-out – a minimum range must be considered. Second, time for the
missile to set up a collision course: After launching, the missile does not
begin to guide until it clears the launch aircraft. This delay lasts for about
1 ∕ 2 second, at the end of which time the missile receives its first guidance
command and starts to set up a collision course. Third, Delta Mach (rate
of closure): At rocket motor burn-out, the missile is traveling about 1.7
Mach above the speed of the launch aircraft. If the launch aircraft has a
high rate of closure, the missile has a faster airspeed relative to the target.
Since it takes a definite time for the influence fuze to arm, and a definite
time for the missile to set up a collision course, the missile must travel a
greater distance, relative to the target, before either one of these occurs.
Missile firing range can be determined by use of the following formula:
Minimum range is equal to 3000 ± (Delta Mach × 3000). To illustrate :
If the launch aircraft is traveling at 1.2 Mach and the target aircraft at .8
Mach, we have a Delta Mach of .4. Applying this to the formula, we see that
minimum range is equal to 3000 + (.4 × 3000), or 4200 feet. The general
“rule-of-thumb” for minimum range, co-airspeed, co-altitude, however,
is 3000 feet. Maximum Range: Maximum range is determined by three
factors – guidance time, air density, and Delta Mach. Missile guidance time
is approximately 18 seconds, which is a constant value applied to both air
density and Delta Mach. Air density is important factor, in that the higher
the air density the greater the aerodynamic drag, thus the shorter the range
over an 18-second time period. Delta Mach is important in that the faster
the launch aircraft, the faster the missile in relation to the target; thus, over
an 18-second time period, the greater the distance the missile will travel.
Many max-range charts have been developed by both the Air Force and
the Navy to depict the maximum range at various altitudes, airspeeds, and
Delta Mach relationships; however, it is virtually impossible to remember
all these relationships.
The following “rules-of-thumb” may be used by the pilot to determine
max range:
(1) For co-speed attacks against trans-sonic bombers – one mile for
altitudes below 10,000 feet, add one-half mile range for each additional
10,000 feet increase in altitude.

4

(2) For co-speed attacks against supersonic targets – one mile range
for altitudes below 20,000 feet and add one-half mile for each additional
10,000-foot increase in altitude. In applying the rules-of-thumb we can
see that Sidewinder’s max-effective range against a sub-sonic target at
30,000 feet would be two miles, or, roughly 10,000 feet slant range. Against
a supersonic target at 30,000 feet, the maximum slant range would be
approximately one and one-half mile, or, roughly 7800 feet.
(3) Delta Mach “rule-of-thumb”: Add one thousand feet for each .1
Delta Mach when above 30,000 feet altitude. To illustrate: A .8 Mach target,
at 30,000 feet, is being attacked by a 1.2-Mach fighter at the same altitude.
Applying the sub-sonic rule-of-thumb, we find that the max-effective range
at which we can launch the missile is 10,000 feet, or approximately 2 miles,
for a co-speed condition. Adding 4000 feet for .4 Delta Mach, we compute
a new max-effective range of 14,000 feet.
The only problem now is range estimation. When in the cockpit of
an attacking fighter, at minimum ranges, there is no problem, since we
may use the ASG-17 radar to determine range. At max range, however,
we are beyond the capability of the radar and must use another means
of determining our approximate range from a given target. For normal
missile firing ranges, fairly accurate range estimation can be accomplished
by comparing a known aircraft wingspan with the sight reticle radius, or
with pipper diameter. Applying the formula,
X=

WS × 1000
S

Where
X = size of the target in mils
WS= wingspan of the target in feet
S = range of the attacking fighter from the target
we can determine the size of the target, in relation to the 70-mil-diameter
reticle or 2-mil pipper.
Example 1:
Size of Badger (wingspan 116’) in mils when range is 10,000’
X=

116 × 1000
= 11.6 or approximately 12 mils
10,000

This means that at 10,000 feet, the Badger wingspan will subtend 1 ∕ 3 of
reticle radius (35 mils). At 20,000 feet the Badger span will be 6 mils and
will subtend 3 pipper widths. At 5,000 feet the Badger span will be 23 mils
and will subtend 2 ∕ 3 of a reticle radius.

5

Example 2
Size of F-100 (wingspan 39’) in mils when range is 10,000 feet
39 × 1000
= 3.9 or approximately 4 mils
10,000
At 10,000 feet the F-100 wingspan will subtend 2 pipper widths. At 20,000
feet it will subtend 1 pipper width, and at 5000 feet, 4 pipper widths or
approximately 1 ∕ 5 of radius.
X=

G
AIM-9B can pull approximately 10G at sea level and approximately
3.5 G at 50,000 feet. The 10G maximum at sea level extends almost
all the way to 30,000 feet. From that altitude upward, the capability
decreases until, at 50,000 feet the missile can pull approximately 3.5 G. In
other words, Sidewinder can pull 10G from sea level to 30,000 feet and
approximately 3.5 G at 50,000 feet. Maximum fighter G, when launching,
is approximately 2G below 40,000 feet and 1.6 G above 40,000 feet. The
G-capability of the missile determines the G-limit on the fighter at launch.
To illustrate: The rate of turn of the fighter in a pursuit curve is dependent
on target speed, angle off, and range, as indicated by the following formula:
Vt × Sin θ
W=
Range
Where
W = Rate of turn in radians per second
Vt = Target velocity in feet per second
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off
By examining the formula we can see that the rate of turn (W) increases
any time target velocity or angle-off increases, and decreases as range
increases. The number of G which the fighter pulls, at a given rate of turn,
is directly proportional to fighter speed, and may be represented by the
following formula:
W=

32.2 × N
Vf

Where
N = Number of radial G
Vf = Fighter velocity in feet per second
W = Rate of turn in radians per second
We can see from the formula that any time fighter velocity increases, we
must also increase G (N), in an effort to maintain a given turn rate.
Rate of turn required for the missile to set up a collision course is
dependent upon five factors: (1) target speed, (2) angle-off,
6

(3) range, (4) enabling time, and, (5) the navigational constant. The
number of G which the missile pulls, for a given rate of turn, is directly
proportional to missile speed. The higher the speed, the higher the G.
If the missile is launched from a Mach 1 fighter pulling 2G, how many
G must the missile pull in order to maintain the same rate of turn as the
launching fighter? As shown by the formula
Vf × W
32.2
since the missile (V) is going 1.7 Mach above the launch aircraft’s velocity,
or 2.7 Mach, it must pull 5.4 G, in order to maintain the same rate of turn
as the launching fighter. Why, then, are we committed to pull a maximum
of 2G when the missile can pull 10G, an amount considerably greater than
the 5.4 G which we just computed? AIM-9B does not begin to guide until
1 ∕ 2 second after launch, at which time it receives its first guidance signal
to set up a collision course. During this enabling period (1 ∕ 2 second) the
missile has the characteristics of an ordinary rocket. Because of this, an
additional rate of turn is necessary to set up its collision course. To set up
the collision course, Sidewinder turns 3 1 ∕ 2 times the rate of turn of the
gyro-seeker – this is a navigational constant. Because of this, the rate of
turn generated by the missile, in the first maneuver, is greater than the
rate of turn of the launching fighter. Since the number of G pulled by the
missile and fighter is equated to rate of turn and velocity, it is obvious that
the 2G limitation of the fighter at launch is tied to the 10G limitation of the
missile. If more than 2G is pulled, the tracking rate of the gyro-seeker is
exceeded by the line-of-sight rate, thus the seeker loses the target.
N=

Another means of exceeding the tracking rate of the gyro-seeker is
to launch the missile with an angle-of-attack in excess of 12° (the angle
between the missile’s longitudinal axis and the launch aircraft’s flight
path). For the F-100, since the missile launcher line is aligned 2° below
the fuselage reference line, the maximum aircraft angle of attack is 14°. If
launched with a greater angle of attack, Sidewinder will jump toward flight
path, causing the tracking rate of the gyro-seeker to be exceeded by the
line-of-sight rate, consequently the gyro-seeker will lose the target. When
this happens, the missile goes ballistic. To avoid exceeding a 14° angle
of attack, the F-100 should not be flown at less than 170 knots in a 1G
condition and 230 knots in a 2G condition.
Lambda
Lambda limit is simply the max look-angle between the axis of the
gyro-seeker and the longitudinal axis of the missile – a 25-degree cone
with its center along the longitudinal axis of the missile. Why are we
interested in this lambda limitation? It is possible for a pilot to satisfy the
conditions of IR, range, and G, yet be outside the lambda capability of the
missile. Lambda limit may be exceeded by a combination of two factors:
low missile velocity and high angle-off.
7

(1) Low Missile Velocity: One-half second after launch, Sidewinder
turns to establish a collision course with the target. Two seconds after
launch, it has a velocity 1.7 Mach greater than that of the launch aircraft.
To establish a collision course, Sidewinder turns 3 1 ∕ 2 times the rate of
the gyro-seeker axis to reduce the line of sight rate to zero, or establish
a constant angular relationship between the missile and the target. After
rocket motor burn-out, the missile begins to slow down. In order to
maintain a collision course after deceleration, the gyro-seeker must look
farther and farther to the side as it nears the target. In other words, as
illustrated by figures 1 and 2, as the missile slows down, the lambda angle
increases until collision occurs.

FAST MISSILE
Figure 1

SLOW MISSILE
Figure 2
8

(2) High Angle-Off, the other basic cause of lambda-limiting is
understood by considering a missile which, immediately upon launching,
could turn onto the collision course. The line-of-sight angle would remain
constant and the gyro-seeker would thus remain with its axis along the
initial pursuit heading. It can be seen in figures 3 and 4 that the collision
course for launching well off the tail differs in direction from the initial
heading much more than does the collision course for launching slightly
off the tail.

LARGE INITIAL ANGLE OFF
Figure 3

SMALL INITIAL ANGLE OFF
Figure 4

9

Consequently, the higher the angle-off, the greater the lambda angle. At
long range (within max missile range) lambda limitation occurs at smaller
angles-off, because of the effect of lambda-limitation on decreasing missile
velocity. At short range, lambda limitation is caused by the sharp turn
which the missile must perform. You will recall that if an attacker fires
with any appreciable angle-off at short range, he will be very near his 2G
limitation, or near the 10G limitation of the missile itself. This means that
the missile is turning sharply to set up its collision course. The sharper the
turn, the higher the missile angle of attack. As shown in figure 5, the angle
of attack adds to the lambda angle so that lambda limit is reached. When
lambda limit is exceeded, the gyro-seeker bumps against a mechanical stop,
slows the gyro to a halt and the missile goes ballistic. Since we have no
instrumentation available to measure lambda limit, we provide an artificial
means to represent this lambda limitation – do not fire at angles-off greater
than 30°. At 40,000 feet and above,

SHORT RANGE LAMBDA LIMITATION
Figure 5

10

do not exceed 10° angle-off – this is primarily because of servo-bias (poor
burning of powder). This will preclude the possibility of an attacking pilot
exceeding the lambda limitation of his missile.
In order to kill with Sidewinder, you must be within the firing
envelope as defined by the infrared, range, G and lambda limitations. If a
pilot exceeds any one of these limits, kill-probability drops drastically. For
practical purposes, we can define the missile firing envelope as a 60° cone
emanating from the tail of the target aircraft, with its length dependent
upon altitude and rate of closure (Delta Mach). For future use, we will
describe this cone as an angular velocity cone or a cone of maximum
performance.
MECHANICS OF THE PURSUIT CURVE
To fully comprehend the limitations of our weapons system, so that
we may develop effective tactics, we need to know something of the nature
of the attack in which we will be employing Sidewinder – the pursuit curve
attack. A pursuit curve attack is basically an attack in which the flight
path of the attacking fighter is continuously pointed at a moving target.
To provide an insight into this type of attack, we will employ the following
formula.
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ
32.2 N

Where
S = Range
Vf = Fighter velocity in feet per second
Vt = Target velocity in feet per second
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off of the attacking fighter
N = Number of radial Gs pulled by the attacker
With the above formula, we can compute the range for a given G and
angle-off for any combination of target and fighter speeds. It should be
noted however, that the formula does not consider lead for target motion,
nor does it represent the flight path of the attacking aircraft. Instead it
represents distance/bearing relationships for a given set of values at a
specific point in space.
Despite the above limitations , the formula is still valid, in that it provides
an insight into the problems associated with the pursuit curve. Study of the
formula reveals:
1. The area of vulnerability is a narrow cone emanating from the tail
of the target aircraft. This can be amply illustrated in the formula above by
analyzing figure 6.
11

For fighter and target at 35,000’,
Vf = 1.2M = 693 KTAS = 1,170’ ∕ second
Vt = .8M = 463 KTAS = 782’ ∕ second
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 28, 450 × Sin θ
=
32.2 N
N

For N = 3, S = 9,480 Sinθ
θ
15°
20°
25°
30°

For N = 3.5, S = 8,130 Sinθ

S
2,460’
3,240
4,010’
4,740’

θ
15°
20°
25°
30°

S
2,110’
2,780’
3,440’
4,060’

Figure 6
As shown in figure 6, the cone becomes narrower at firing ranges if the fighter
velocity and/or target velocity is increased. In other words, the attacking fighter will
be forced to fire at smaller angles-off if he does not wish to increase his firing range.
Reducing angle-off against bomber-type targets places the attacking fighter in the
bomber’s effective cone of fire. Therefore, if the velocities of the target and fighter
increase, and we do not reduce angle-off, the range must, of necessity, increase. The
increase in range will be in proportion to the velocity increase of the fighter or the
target. If both target and fighter velocities are increased, the increase in range will
be a multiple of the increases of the fighter and target velocities (for example – if Vf
and Vt are doubled, the range will be quadrupled).
2. The cone becomes narrower with an increase in altitude (the formula is
a function of fighter velocity, G, and angle-off). It is a recognized fact that the
available G of the fighter decreases with an increase in altitude and, as shown in the
formula, any such decrease in G will be accompanied by an increase in range.
In a curve of pursuit, the rate of turn necessary to track a given target is
determined by range, angle-off and target velocity. This rate of turn may be
expressed by the following formula:
W=

Vt × Sin θ
Range

Where
W = Radians per second
Vt = Target velocity in feet per second
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off
12

On the basis of the formula, if angle-off diminishes more rapidly than the
range, the rate of turn will decrease (this will occur in some part of the
pursuit curve when the fighter velocity is less than twice the velocity of the
target). If range diminishes more rapidly than angle-off, throughout the
curve, the rate of turn or G will increase (this will occur when the fighter
velocity is more than twice as great as the velocity of the target). To find
the parts of the curve where we will achieve these increases or decreases in
rates of turn, we can use the following formula:
CoSin of the angle-off where maximum G occurs =

Vf
2 × Vt

Where
Vf = Fighter velocity
Vt = Target velocity
NOTE: These two velocities may be expressed in knots, miles per hour,
feet per second, or any other appropriate unit, as long as Vf and Vt are
expressed in like values.
This formula will enable us to determine the point on the pursuit
curve where maximum G will be encountered. For example: If we have
a fighter with a velocity of 1.2 Mach attacking a target with a velocity of
.8 Mach, the point of max-G will be about 41.4° angle-off. Therefore, in
effect, we are saying that at angles greater than 41.4°, the rate of turn (or
G) is increasing. At angles of less than 41.4° the rate of turn is decreasing.
To further illustrate – if we have a fighter traveling at twice or greater than
twice the speed of the tar­get, the max-G point will occur at zero-degrees
angle-off. In other words, there will be a G build-up or an increase in the
rate of turn throughout the entire pass.
In pursuit attacks with today’s fighter-bomber velocities, a fighter is
forced to fire under conditions where its velocity is less than twice that
of the target. In this type of attack, the fighter is not only forced to fire
at longer ranges, but also to fire where his rate of turn is decreasing. We
can see from studying figure 7 that the attacker’s rate of turn is not only
decreasing, but it is decreasing at an increasing rate. In other words, the
attacker is being “sucked” or forced in-trail. As illustrated in figure 7, the
attacker loses .19 G/sec at 30° angle-off. At 25° angle-off he loses .27 G ∕ sec
and so on until at 10° angle-off he loses .45 G ∕ sec.

13

For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = 1.2M
Vt = .8M
Angle of Max-G = 41.4°
Nr = 4 @ 41.4°

θ
41.4°
30°
25°
20°
15°
10°

N
4
3.83
3.64
3.36
2.97
2.49

Ń
0
.19
.27
.35
.41
.46

S
4620
3660
3260
2850
2440
1960

Figure 7

If the attacker decreases his G at the max-G point (with the same
fighter velocities as shown is figure 8, he will be able to diminish his rate of
G bleed-off. However, this will force him to fire at longer ranges. Naturally
an attacker does not want to do this, because, as range increases, his bullet
density decreases by a function of the square (if range doubles, bullet
density quarters). As a result, an attacker must fire over a longer time span
to deliver a lethal burst. At the same time, he must track a target smaller in
perspective. Under these conditions, it becomes quite difficult to deliver an
effective burst.
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = 1.2 Mach
Vt = .9 Mach
Angle of Max-G = 41.4°
Nr = 3 @ 41.4°

14

θ
41.4°
30°
25°
20°
15°
10°

N
3
2.88
2.74
2.53
2.23
1.87

Ń
0
.11
.16
.20
.23
.26

S
6180
4870
4330
3790
3250
2600

Figure 8

If the attacker increases his G at the Max-G point, as shown in figure
9, he will be able to fire at shorter ranges. However, if he does this, his G
bleed-off will become even more rapid than originally shown.
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = 1.2 Mach
Vt = .8 Mach
Angle of Max G = 41.4°
Nr = 5 @ 41.1°
Ń = Rate of change G ∕ sec 2

θ
41.4°
30°
25°
20°
15°
10°

N
5
4.80
4.56
4.21
3.72
3.12

Ń
0
.30
.43
.55
.63
.72
Figure 9

15

S
3710
2920
2600
2280
1950
1560

LIMITATIONS OF OUR WEAPONS SYSTEM IN A PURSUIT CURVE
ATTACK
To accurately predict the lead requirement (prediction angle) any
sight requires the following basic information: range and target angular
velocity. In the disturbed sight, range is provided by the ranging radar
and target angular velocity information is acquired by tracking the target
aircraft. Since the pilot is forced to turn his aircraft at a certain rate, this
rate of turn is a representation of target motion and is directly proportional
to target speed. The angular velocity of the attacking aircraft is fed into the
sight through gyro action. This information is then married to the input
from the radar and the proper prediction angle is computed by placing an
electrical restraint (stiffness current) on the gyros. At long ranges, little
restraint is applied, while at short ranges, great restraint is applied. In other
words, the disturbed sight is directly tied to the responses of the pilot and
to the dynamics of the aircraft when computing for target motion.
In an attack where the fighter velocity is less than twice that of the
target, the following occurs:
1. The rate of turn necessary to track the target diminishes as the
range decreases.
2. The stiffness current to the gyros in the sight increases as the range
decreases.
Because of these two conditions, a pilot closing for the attack experiences
a sensation that the pipper is drifting in front of the target. To correct
for this, he relaxes back-pressure to reduce his turn rate. This, in turn,
creates a lower rate input to the sight gyros, which causes the pipper
to be repositioned to match the new turn rate. So, once again, the pilot
must change is turn rate to reposition his tracking index, which again
repositions his pipper and so on. Yet, for the attacker to have the proper
prediction angle, he must continually make these corrections and also tract
the target one-half to two-thirds the time of flight of the bullet, to allow for
sight solution time. As we can see, a pilot may nullify this effect of chasing
the pipper by firing at lower G. However, if he does, he will be forced to fire
at longer range. His sight will have even less restraint and his target will be
smaller in perspective. If he fires at higher G (shorter range) his sight will
have more restraint, but the prediction angle will continuously change in
greater magnitude. As a result, the attacker has very little choice as to the
type of pass he may execute. He is forced into a narrow attack cone to avoid
either extreme.
To solve this problem of G bleed-off, we must refer back to the
mechanics of the pursuit curve. You will recall that if an attacker’s

16

velocity is twice or more than twice that of a target, there will be an
increase in rate of turn. In attacks of this nature, a different situation exist.
1. The rate of turn necessary to track a target increases as the range
decreases.
2. The stiffness current to the sight gyros increases as the rate
decreases.
In an attack where these conditions exist, the pipper tends to remain on the
target because the forward drift of the pipper is cancelled by the demand
for greater G as range diminishes. In this attack, as the prediction angle
is changing less in magnitude, the pilot has a more stable tracking index,
and consequently, is more able to track for the required time to achieve
sight solution. Naturally, this would be the ideal attack for us to perform;
however, this is impossible, because the disproportionate increase in
fighter and target velocities has not only pushed the firing range out, but
has also created conditions where the sight prediction angle is continuously
changing in considerable magnitude. These conditions seriously impair
our ability to destroy a non-maneuvering target with a gun attack.
AIM-9B Missile
Sidewinder is not affected by the limitations of a computing sight
because, in a missile attack, the pilot uses a 70-mil tracking cone with a
fixed sight. This allows him to track the target quite successfully. The G
bleed-off characteristics of today’s pursuit attacks actually help the attacker
to position himself within the 60° launch cone behind the target aircraft,
since the attacker is being forced into the trail position – behind his
respective target – with a G bleed-off.
TYPES OF PURSUIT CURVE ATTACKS
Until now, we have made a general analysis of the type of attack we
will be performing against high-speed targets. Now, we will discuss specific
types of pursuit curve attacks and see if one or more of these attacks offers
advantages over the others. There are four basic types of pursuit attack:
1. The High-side or Level Attack
2. The Overhead Attack
3. The underside Attack
4. The Nose-quarter Attack

17

The High-Side Attack
In any attack, the rate of turn which an attacker needs to track a target
may be expressed as radial G, and can be shown by the following formula:
N=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ
32.2 S

The radial G expressed here represents the lateral acceleration of the
fighter in the horizontal plane. It does not represent the total G on the
aircraft, since it neglects the pull of gravity (1G). Total G is the resultant
of radial G and 1G pull of gravity acting through the vertical axis of the
aircraft. This total G determines angle of attack – the angle between the
mean chord line and the relative wind. Since total G determines angle of
attack, the aircraft stalls on total G. In view of this fact, and because our
previous formula considered only radial G, we must determine the exact
relationship between total and radial G. It may be expressed as follows:
Gt2 = Gr2 + 1
Where
Gt = Total G
Gr = Radial G
1 = 1 G gravity
We can see, by the formula, that total G will always be greater than radial
G. This is a disadvantage, because the rate of turn which an attacker needs
to track a target, or the range to which an attacker can approach a target is
dependent upon radial G, not total G. This disadvantage becomes less at
higher G values because the difference between total and radial G is less.
Example:
If Gt = 4
Gr = Gt − 1 = 16 − 1 = 3.87
If Gt = 1
Gr = Gt − 1 = 4 − 1 = 1.73
The difference between 2 and 1.73 = .27 whereas the difference between 4
and 3.87 = .13
Since a greater difference exist between Gt and Gr at lower G values, the
rate of turn is reduced not only because less total G is available, but also
because an even greater loss of radial G is experienced.
18

The Overhead Attack
The overhead attack, as compared to the high-side or level attack, has
the apparent advantage of maintaining airspeed and G because the thrust
vector and gravity act together to provide a greater total force. However,
to determine whether or not there is a real advantage, let’s examine the
difference between rate of turn (GR) and total G. To digress, let’s assume
that an aircraft is in straight-and-level flight. How many G will show on
the G-meter? One G. Now, let’s assume that an aircraft is in straight-andlevel flight, but upside down. How many G will show on the G-meter? One
negative G. Now remembering these relationships, let’s note the total and
radial G relationships at four points around a loop – the pull-up, the 90°
point, the 180° point, and the 270° point. For example: let’s assume that the
aircraft is pulling 4 total G at the pull up as illustrated in figure 10. How
many radial G is it pulling? Three. Then, in effect, we have added 3 G to
the 1G needed for straight-and-level flight, to give us 4 total G at pull-up.
At the 90° point,when pulling 4 total G, we will also be pulling 4 radial G.
At this point, gravity is 90° from our vertical axis, thereby exerting no pull
along this axis — instead, it is a drag factor action 180° from the aircraft
line of flight. At the 180° point, when we are pulling 4 total G, we will have
5 radial G, thereby giving us a turn rate – at a given airspeed – greater than
at any other point on the loop. In other words, as compared to the pull-up,
gravity (1G) acts in the opposite direction, therefore gravity must add to,
rather than subtract from total G, to provide a greater radial G. At the 270°
point, once again, total G equals radial G except that gravity acts in the
same direction as the aircraft line of flight. From the 270° point on, radial
G diminishes in relation to total G until the pull-up point is reached. At
this point we again have 1G difference between total and radial G.
In an overhead attack, to determine the difference between total and
radial G, we may use the following formula:
Gt = Gr + Cosθ
Where
Gt = Total G
Gr = Radial G
Cosθ = Cosine of the angle-off
It is obvious, from the formula, that the relationship between total and
radial G is considerably different from that experienced in a high-side pass.
Example:
In a Level Pass where Gt = 4,
Gr = 16 − 1 = 3.87

19

Figure 10

20

In an Overhead Pass at 30° angle-off where Gt = 4
Gr = Gt - Cosθ or Gr = 4 - .866 = 3.14
As shown in the example above, if an attacker is force to fire inside an
opponent’s maximum performance cone – at angles of less than 30° – this
means that from .866 to 1 more G, above radio G, is necessary to track
a given target. Thus, as compared to a high-side attack, even though an
attacker may have an apparent advantage in maintaining higher G, it is
largely wiped out by the greater difference between radial and total G. The
important thing to keep in mind here is that the overhead attack offers no
significant advantages over the high-side attack.
Underside Attack
The Underside Attack provides an effect just opposite that illustrated
in the overhead pass. Here, an attacker generates a radial G higher than
total G upon his aircraft (you will recall that in the top half of the loop,
radial G is greater than total G) and may be expressed by the following
formula:
Gt = Gr - Cosθ
If we assume the same attack conditions as illustrated in the overhead pass
– 30° angle-off, 4 total G – we get the following results:
Gr = 4 + .866 or
Gr = 4.866
In terms of G, this attack seems to provide an apparent advantage, however
this does not always hold true. For example: If an attacker performed
an underside attack in an F-100, he would experience a rapid speed
decay, because of gravity as well as induced drag. As a result, since speed
determines G available, the attacker would have much less total G. In
addition, because of airspeed decay, the attacker would diminish the
fighter-target ratio. As a consequence, the attacker’s max-G point would be
forced farther out – in angle-off, and range – causing a further reduction in
both total and radial G. As a result, the F-100 would not gain appreciably
by this attack, since total G available is reduced sufficiently to cancel out
the advantage of a higher radial G. However, if this same attack were
executed in an aircraft with a very high power-to-weight ratio and a lowdrag profile – such as the F-104 – the attack could be invaluable, since high
speed decay and G bleed-off would not occur.

21

Nose Quarter Attack
A nose-quarter attack is ineffective for the following two reasons:
1. We cannot launch the Aim-9B missile from this position, because
of the missile’s IR limitations.
2. In a gun attack from a nose-quarter position, we can avoid the
defensive-fire coverage of a given bomber. However, in this type attack, the
rate of closure becomes so high that an attacker cannot deliver an effective
burst and avoid a collision with a target. For these two reasons, we will not
consider this attack further.
THE BEST TYPE ATTACK AGAINST A NON-MANEUVERING
TARGET WITH AIM-9B
To determine the best type attack to employ with the missile, let’s first
examine the possible attacks which we may employ with this equipment.
There are four basic sidewinder attacks which we may employ.
1. Overhead Attack
2. The High-side Attack
3. The Six-O’clock Attack
4. The Underside Attack
Overhead Attack
The Overhead Attack has two basic disadvantages – IR and G. As
you will recall, IR tone contrast against sunlight-reflective background –
clouds, and ground – forces us to diminish our effective slant range, until
we are approximately 6000’ to 8000’ from our target. This IR limitation,
combined with the 2G limitation, allows an attacker to fire only at low
angles off. To illustrate, by figure 11, if an attacker pulls 2G inside an
opponent’s cone of max performance – angular velocity cone – he will
generate a radial G considerably different than the total G on the G meter.
For example, at 30° angle-off, applying the formula Gt - Gr + Cosθ, we
find that the attacker is only able to generate 1.134 Gr.

22

For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Vt = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Gt = 2
θ = 10°, 20°, 30°
Gr @ 10° = 2 - .985 = 1.015
Gr @ 20° = 2 - .94 = 1.06
Gr @ 30° = 2 - .866 = 1.134
For θ = 10°
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 23700 × Sin θ 23, 700 × .174
=
=
= 4.060
32.2Gr
Gr
1.015

For θ = 20°
S=

23, 700 × .342
= 7.650
1.06

For θ = 30°
S=

23, 700 × .5
= 10.450
1.134
Figure 11

At 20° angle-off, applying the same formula, we find that the attacker can generate
1.06 Gr. At 10° angle-off, he can generate only 1.015 Gr. Now let’s assume that
the fighter making this attack is going .9 Mach against a .9 Mach target at 35,000’.
Applying the formula:
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ
32.2 N

Where
Vf = .9 Mach or 873’ / S
Vt = .9 Mach or 873’ / S
Sine of 30° = .5
N = 1.134
we find that, at 30° angle-off, an attacker can get no closer than 10,450’. At 20° angleoff – where Sinθ = .342 and N = 1.06 – we find that an attacker can get no closer
than 7,650’. At 10° angle off, using the same procedure, we find that an attacker can
get no closer than 4,060’. Since an attacker cannot receive proper IR discrimination
at ranges greater than 6000 to 8000 feet, he will be forced to launch his missile inside
20 degrees angle-off in order to secure a kill. Certainly this poses no great problem,
as the
23

attacker will be forced in-trail since the fighter/target ratio is much less
than 2 to 1. However, despite this aid from a low fighter/target ratio, the
overhead attack is the poorest possible for employment of AIM-9B. (This
will become especially apparent when we discuss fighter-versus-fighter
tactics.)
High-Side Attack
In a High-side Attack, IR tone contrast will not be adequate at
longer missile ranges because of background reflections: however, when
compared to an overhead attack, IR range is somewhat better. G presents
no significant limitation, as illustrated by figure 12.
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Vt = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Gt = 2 Gr = 1.73
Gt = 1.6 Gr = 1.25
Vf × Vt × Sin θ 23, 700 × Sin θ
S=
=
32.2Gr
Gr
S = 13,700 Sinθ
Gr = 1.73

10° = 2380
20° = 4680
30° = 6840

S = 19,000 Sinθ
Gr = 1.25

10° = 3300
20° = 6490
30° = 9480
Figure 12

This figure discloses that when below 40,000 feet and pulling 2G, we
will be generating 1.73 radial G. Applying this figure to our cone of
max performance (our angular velocity cone) we find that at 30° angleoff, we can close to a range of 6,840 feet and at 10° angle-off, 2,380 feet,
but the important thing to remember is that we cannot get inside the
ranges specified at 30°, 20° and 10° angle-off without exceeding the 2-G
limitation. At 40,000 feet, when we are pulling 1.6 total G, we will be
generating 1.25 radial G. In terms of distance, we will be at the range
specified in the figure above. Once again, if we attempt to get inside the
specified range at a given angle-off, we will exceed our 1.6-G limitation.
We can see, by comparing the high-side attack with the overhead
attack, that the high-side is better, because of less limitations in IR and
G. In other words, we have greater freedom of maneuver to successfully
launch Sidewinder.
24

Six-O’clock Attack
In a six-o’clock attack, IR tone contrast occurs at greater ranges
because the horizon does not reflect as much background IR radiation.
Since we are at 0° angle-off, there will be no G or lambda limitation,
therefore we can fire Sidewinder from any range between maximum and
minimum. In view of these facts, the six-o’clock attack is the best so far,
because AIM-9B is not forced to operate near its limiting parameters. In
addition because of our position in relation to the target, we achieve an
element of surprise.
Underside Attack
The underside or six-o’clock-low attack, is the best possible attack we
can execute, as we acquire advantages in:
1. IR
2. G
3. Surprise
4. Aircraft Performance
IR Tone contrast is maximum against a blue-sky background. Here, the
lead sulphide cell can discriminate between he hot metal of the jet’s tailpipe
and the blue sky. At ranges of 20,000 feet and greater, the IR pattern
becomes longer than the range of the missile. The G limitation, in relation
to missile range and IR tone contrast, is almost non-existent (see figure 13).
For fighter and target at 35 - 80,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Vt = .9 Mach = 873’ / second
Gt = 2
Gr @10° = 2 + .985 = 2.985
Gr @ 20° = 2 + .94 = 2.94
Gr @ 30° = 2 + .866 = 2.866
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 23, 700 × Sin θ
=
32.2Gr
Gr

For θ = 10°,
23, 700 × .174
S=
= 1, 380 '
2.985
For θ = 30°,
23, 700 × .5
S=
= 4,130 '
2.866
25

For θ = 20°,
23, 700 × .342
S=
= 2, 760 '
2.94

This figure shows that, as we approach our cone of maximum
performance, we find that we can generate 2.866 radial G while pulling
2 total G. Applying this value to the figure above, we find that we can
launch Sidewinder at a range as near as 4,130 feet at 30° angle-off without
exceeding our 2-G limitation. At 20° angle-off while generating 2.94 radial
G, we find that we can launch as near as 2,760 feet without exceeding the
2-total-G limitation. At 10° angle-off, we can launch at a range as close
as 1,380 feet. To put it another way, when we launch our missile against a
target from an underside attack, the missile must turn in the direction of
gravity to set up its collision course – thus, gravity, acting in the direction
of the missile’s turn, actually causes the missile to fall toward the target. In
other words, the missile has a maneuvering advantage, since it generates a
radial G greater than its total G. This advantage we have already considered
in the previous illustration. Surprise, the third major advantage, is greatest
when attacking a target from underneath, or from six-o’clock-low, since
this is the target’s blind area. Aircraft Performance, the forth major
advantage, can be understood by referring to figure 14.

UNDERSIDE ATTACK
Figure 14

26

Here, we are an attacker ready to launch AIM-9B against a target traveling
.9 Mach at 40,000 feet. Applying a rule-of-thumb for co-airspeed, we see
that the fighter can launch from a max range of about 13,000’. Now, if the
attacker sets himself up to launch from 30° angle-off, this means that he
can launch from a position 6,500 feet below the target. To achieve this
launch position, an attacker may start his attack at even a lower altitude –
the distance below dependent upon his airspeed. For example: An F-100 at
1.1 Mach may start his attack with an altitude differential of at least 10,000
feet – in this case, at 30,000 feet altitude. From this illustration, we can see
that AIM-9B gives an attacker an additional performance capability, in that
the attacker is not required to attain the target’s altitude.
In summary, since the underside attack provides the greatest
advantages – IR, G, surprise and performance – we should employ this
attack whenever possible. As you will see later, this holds true for both
fighter-versus-bomber and fighter-versus-fighter. When compared with a
gun attack, AIM-9B is far superior, since the range of the missile allows us
to get into an effective cone of fire.
BEST TYPE OF ATTACK AGAINST A NON-MANEUVERING TARGET
WITH THE 20MM CANNON
As you will recall, because of the characteristics of the pursuit curve,
our fire control system limitations, and the capabilities of our opponent’s
defensive fire, we consider the pursuit curve a poor attack at best, when
using the 20mm cannon. If does not matter whether we are in an overhead,
a high-side or an underside attack. The problem now is, how are we going
to attack a non-maneuvering target if we do not choose to use the pursuit
curve as illustrated previously. The solution we propose: Plan an attack in
which we combine the characteristics of the pursuit curve and the collision
course. To explain: On a collision course attack, the target will be allowed
to fly right through our bullet stream. The bullet stream itself will have
no angular velocity as generated in a pursuit curve type attack. A 100foot target with a speed of 800 feet per second, at 30,000 feet will require
approximately 1 ∕ 8 of a second to fly through our bullet stream. Assuming
that we can fire 6,000 round per minute – the combined rate of fire of 4
M-39 cannon – this means we fire at a rate of approximately 100 round per
second. If the target requires 1 ∕ 8 of a second to pass through our bullet
stream, we can expect about 12 hits it we set up a perfect attack. This is not
acceptable. In a pursuit curve attack, we do not have this problem, because
the angular velocity of our bullet stream matches the angular velocity of
our target. In other words, our bullet stream is constantly superimposed
against the target which is being tracked. The only disadvantage of this
attack is that it forces us into our opponent’s defensive cone of fire. To
counter the disadvantages of the pursuit curve and the collision course, we
assume attack conditions against an imaginary target and

27

apply them against a real target. To illustrate: We set up an attack so that
the angular velocity of our bullet stream matches that of a target going
slower than .8 Mach – say .5 Mach. This allows us to fire at a higher angleoff, at a given range, because of the slower target. Then we apply this
imaginary attack – against a .5-Mach target – to the .8-Mach target. To do
this, we place our reticle in front of the .8-mach target, generating the G
necessary to track a .5-Mach target which means our real target (.8) closes
upon our bullet stream (.5) with a delta Mach of .3 which, at 30,000 feet,
is 300 feet per second. Firing 100 rounds per second, this allows us to put
approximately 33 holes in the target with a perfect pass, as compared to 12
in a collision course.
Our only requirement is to figure the amount of lead necessary, when
firing. To determine lead, we need to know three components;
1. Lead for target motion
2. Lead for gravity drop.
3. Trajectory shift.
If we use a fixed sight, we will have to determine all three
components. If we use radar, or keep the sight pegged at the range from
which we plan to fire, gravity drop and trajectory shift will be completely
computed and lead for target motion partially computed. We’ll use pegged
sight, to simplify our lead problem. Radar is not applicable because the
overhead needed to set up the attack takes us out of our radar tracking
cone. To determine the additional lead we need to enable our pegged sight
to indicate the bullet impact area, we use the following formula:
Lead =

Vt × Sin θ × 1000
Vp

Where
Vt = rate of closure of the target, in feet per second toward the bullet stream
Sinθ = Sine of the angle-off
Vp = average projectile velocity (dynamic gravity drop tables)
Lead = additional lead in mils
The lead in mils which we acquire from the above formula is placed in the
sight reticle, so that the outer diamond indicates the bullet impact area as
the target passes through the reticle. To compute the lead for insertion into
out sight reticle we use the following formula:

28

WS
2 × lead in mils
=
Firing Range
1000
In order to solve for both additional lead and reticle size, we need to know
the firing range and the angle-off at which we’ll be firing. Assume that we
attack a target which is traveling .8 Mach (at 35,000 feet) at .9 Mach with 3
Gr.
Step I
To find the firing range and angle-off, we assume a .5-Mach target and
solve in the following manner:
At 35,000’,
Vf = .9 Mach
VT = .5 Mach
N=3
θ = 30°, 25°, 20°
S=

Vf × Vt × Sin θ 873 × 485 × Sin θ
=
= 4380(Sin θ )
32.2 N
96.6

At 30°
S = 4380 (.5) = 2190’
At 25°
S = 4380 (.423) = 1850’
At 20°
S = 4380 (.342) = 1500’
Step II
To find the additional lead (in mils) needed against a .8 Mach target
we solve in the following manner:
l=

Vt × (Sin θ ) × 1000
Vp

At 30°
291'× (.5) × 1000
l=
= 38 mils
3840
At 25°
l=

291'× (.423) × 1000
= 32 mils
3880
29

At 20°
291 × (.342) × 1000
l=
= 25.5 mils
3920
Step III
To determine the additional lead to be incorporated into the sight
reticle we solve in the following manner:
At 30° angle-off
WS
2 × lead in mils
=
Firing Range
1000
WS
76
=
2190 1000
WS = 166
At 25° angle-off
WS
64
=
1850 1000
WS = 118
At 20° angle-off
WS
51
=
1500 1000
WS = 76
From Step III we can see that it will be impossible to set up the additional
lead by placing the wingspan lever on 166 since 120 is the maximum
setting. This means that we can either fire at 1850’, 25° angle-off (steps I
and II with the wingspan lever at 118) or at 1500’, 20° angle-off with the
wingspan lever at 76. Since we want to fire at max angle-off, we’ll set the
wingspan lever at 118 and fire at 1850’, 25° angle-off.
Now to perform the attack. We do not use the conventional pursuit
curve approach, as this does not allow us to determine target speed and
direction, and we need these factors to apply the attack we have just
computed. To apply this attack correctly, we use a barrel-roll type of attack.
To set it up, we fly in the same direction as the target and about 3,000 to
4,000 feet above it. From there we turn about 10° from his line of flight,
barrel-roll — in the direction of

30

the turn - down to a key point, trying to maintain an almost constant
angular relationship between us and the target. See figure 15. From here,
we place the sight reticle well out in front of the target, in line with his
flight path, and pull the G necessary to track the imaginary target. As we
close to our firing range and angle-off, the target will move toward our
sight reticle. As the target starts to cross the outer diamond, we depress the
gun trigger and hold it down until the tail of the target passes through the
outer diamond. From there we recover and set up another attack by kicking
in afterburner and rolling back to the same position on top of the target.
This attack has definite advantages: It allows the attacker to fire at a
higher angle-off than in a pure pursuit curve attack. It allows the attacker
to fly through the target’s defensive cone of fire at a faster rate than is
possible in a normal pursuit curve attack. Since he is flying a combination
of a pursuit curve and a collision course, another and probably the most
important advantage is that the attacker finds it easy to reposition himself
for consecutive attacks. This is possible because the attacker is alway close
enough to the target to judge relative positioning. The big disadvantage of
the barrel-roll attack – as we employ it – is that it provides the attacker less
time for lethal fire. However, in view of the fact that a fighter can perform
more consecutive attacks than in a normal pursuit curve, this disadvantage
does not appear to be too restrictive.
In summary, we do not advocate the barrel-roll attack as a cure-all
for fire control problems encountered when firing against bomber-type
aircraft. Instead, we consider it somewhat of a “Rube Goldberg” affair
designed to surmount the problems associated with today’s normal
pursuit curve attack, when using guns as the means for ordnance delivery.
Although it appears difficult to perform, pilots are able, with just a
minimum of practice, to set themselves up quite successfully.
MANEUVERING FOR THE ATTACK
Success, in air-to-air combat, depends on the ability of a pilot to place
himself in a position from which he can deliver his fire power. In fighterversus-bomber combat, time is important also and can be considered a
measurement of success. To illustrate: If we have a bomber attempting
to destroy a given target, we must not only position ourselves to deliver
our fire power, but must also expedite our positioning before the bomber
reaches “bombs away” points. Since timing is so critical, we must use the
very best method by which we can position ourselves for this attack. As
we have shown, the best weapon in terms of performance and ease of
delivery, is AIM-9B. The best attack with this weapon and our aircraft, is
the underside attack. Positioning for this attack depends upon the space
relationship between you and the target. Considering this relationship, GCI
may provide a set-up from three possible positions.

31

Figure 15
32
ROLL-SLIDE ATTACK

1. Nose-quarter
2. Abeam, or 90°
3. Tail-quarter
Assuming VFR conditions, it will be the responsibility of each attacker –
upon visually acquiring the target – to maneuver from any one of these
set-ups to the firing envelope behind the target. To get into this position
quickly, an attacker must maneuver in a three-dimensional field to acquire
the maximum benefits from airspeed and turn. If the attacker does not
understand three-dimensional maneuvering, he will be little more effective
than GCI in maneuvering from a setup or approach, to a final firing
position (GCI will place him in the firing envelope through the use of twodimensional maneuvers).
The Nose-Quarter Attack: In performing the nose-quarter attack, we
do not choose to approach our target from a direct head-on position. If we
do, we will be forced to perform a 180° change of direction by executing
a level or a climbing turn (high-speed yo-yo) to approach our target from
a six-o’clock position. The time consumed in a level turn allows the target
to generate a great amount of longitudinal separation. This allows the
target aircraft to make considerable penetration of a defense area before
the attacker can set up a missile attack. The climbing turn or high-speed
yo-yo allows the attacker to complete his change of direction in less time;
however, at the end of this maneuver, the attacker will find himself with
considerable longitudinal separation in relation to the target, since his
airspeed has decayed considerably below that of the target. Once again,
the target aircraft will effect considerable penetration before the attacker
can position himself to launch AIM-9B. If the attacker is directed by GCI
for a nose-quarter attack, he should request GCI to set him up on an
anti-parallel course to an offset point 15,000 feet to one side of the target’s
line of flight. When the attacker visually acquires the target, or when GCI
indicates that he is ten miles from the target, the attacker should apply full
afterburner power. At the same time, he should dive to an altitude about
5,000 feet below the target, so he will be offset in both the vertical and
horizontal planes. This provides the attacker with maneuvering airspeed
and a position from which to execute a chandelle followed by a low-speed
yo-yo (a dive behind and below the target) to the attack cone behind the
target. See figure 16. Compared to a level turn, this maneuver allows the
attacker to complete his 180° change of direction more rapidly. In addition,
since the attacker is turning through both the vertical and horizontal
planes, his horizontal turning component is reduced. As a result of these
two factors – fast turn rate and small turn radius – the attacker will be in
a position much nearer the target’s attack cone. To prevent the target from
penetrating the defense area excessively, the attacker must dive behind and
below the target at the completion of 90°

33

Figure 16

34
NOSE-QUARTER ATTACK

of turn. This will aid the attacker in recouping the speed lost in the
chandelle. Also, it allows him to turn inside the target’s line of flight,
because he is able to reduce his horizontal turning component by
maneuvering through both the vertical and horizontal planes. Result:
The attacker quickly positions himself – at six-o’clock-low – to launch
Sidewinder.
The Beam or 90° Approach: In a beam approach, our problem
remains essentially the same as that in a nose-quarter attack. That is, we
must quickly place the attacker in a launch position, to reduce penetration
time. The best means by which to accomplish this, upon visually acquiring
the target, is to use afterburner and perform a diving turn, below and
behind the target’s line of flight. Once again, afterburner, coupled with a
descending turn, will increase rate of closure, because of rapid acceleration.
At the same time, since the turn is through both the vertical and horizontal
planes, a cutoff is easily effected. Result: the attacker is quickly set up for
a missile attack from six-o’clock-low. If the beam attack starts from a high
position, the same procedures should still be used. Remember, the attacker
wants to reduce the target’s penetration time. At the same time, he wants
to set up for the best possible attack. A diving turn or low-speed yo-yo will
satisfy both of these conditions. If a beam attack is initiated from a low
position, the previous procedures still apply, since the attacker is trying
to reduce target penetration time by rapid closure and a cutoff inside the
target’s line of flight.
In a tail-quarter attack, the problem of defense area penetration is
most critical. To reduce this penetration time and to allow the attacker to
position himself for the best possible missile attack, he must accomplish a
dive below and inside his opponent’s line of flight, up to an attack position
(inside yo-yo). Since penetration time is so critical, the procedure will
remain the same whether the attack starts from a high or low position.
FLIGHT TACTICS
Tactical formation, hence flight tactics, are designed primarily to
provide maximum mutual support and visual cross cover and retain
maximum maneuverability for any air-to-air operation. In other words,
tactical formations must provide both defensive and offensive capabilities.
To provide these capabilities, a compromise between maximum mutual
support and maximum maneuverability must be accomplished. The
extent of the compromise will depend upon the type of mission flown.
Though our mission – fighter-versus-bomber – emanates from a defensive
situation, it is offensive in nature, in that the fighter is trying to destroy the
bomber aircraft and is not primarily interested in providing security for
himself.
The present concept of weapons employment (nuclear weapons)
indicates that a given enemy will employ saturation-type tactics rather than
a concentration of his force over a given target area. In other
35

words, we may expect an attack force composed of single bombers
dispersed over a wide area to strike at many targets. To counter this at all
points, with four-ship scrambles, is not the answer, for we need a defense
force numbering four times that of the strike force. We will be providing
unnecessary security for the attacking fighters, as well as violating the
dictum, “economy of force!” The problem remains – how shall we tactically
deploy our fighters? A single fighter against a single bomber may appear
the obvious answer, however, this is not so. When employing single fighters
against a saturation-type raid, we would be assuming that each fighter
would intercept its respective target without exception. There would be no
ground aborts, air aborts, and/or possible fire control malfunctions. Result:
some attacking bombers would get through our defenses. To preclude this
possibility, we recommend a two-ship flight, as the basic unit, in a given
fighter-versus-bomber intercept. The two-ship flight will be composed of a
leader and his wingman.
In patrol position – prior to visually acquiring the bomber –
the wingman should fly approximately 10 to 20 degrees back and
approximately 1500 feet out. If he flies in much closer, too much time
will be spent in flying formation and not enough in covering the leader
and aiding him in visually acquiring the target. Flying too far out reduces
maneuverability and may cause the wingman to become separated from
his leader. When maneuvering, the wingman will play the outside as well
as the inside of the turn, in a means of maintaining position. To do this
effectively, he must maneuver through both the horizontal and vertical
planes. This will allow him to reduce his horizontal turning component
and thus maintain his relative position more easily. Procedure: When on
the outside of a turn, the wingman should lower his nose and cross to the
inside. If on the inside of the turn, and sliding forward, he would cross to
the outside, slide high and fly in the plane of the leader. In other words, a
wingman will fly a partial extended-low position, on the inside of the turn,
and an extended high position – in the plane of the leader’s wing – on the
outside of the turn. One thing for the wingman to remember: He must
not cross in front of the leader. Instead, he should always maintain nosetail separation, thus precluding the possibility of getting in the way of his
leader.
To reduce the bomber’s defense-area penetration, the flight must
quickly maneuver from the approach to the best attack position. To do
this, the flight must maneuver at max performance through both the
vertical and horizontal planes. Under these circumstances, it would be
quite difficult for the wingman to maintain the patrol position defined
above. To enable the wingman to maintain a relative position during
these maneuvers, we place him in a new position – the fighting position.
Fighting Position: The wingman will fly within a 60° cone behind the
leader at a distance of about 1000 feet. See figure 17. While flying in the
cone, the wingman will maneuver through both the horizontal and

36

Figure 17

37
FIGHTING POSITION

vertical planes to maintain position. He will slide high when overshooting,
and drop low to the inside when falling back. In other words, the
maneuvering technique is basically the same as that of the patrol position.
If the leader is unable to deliver a successful attack against a bomber
aircraft, the wingman will take over the lead position and initiate the
attack. If neither the wingman nor the leader can deliver a successful
missile attack, they will press in – with afterburner – and zoom above the
target aircraft. From this position, they can execute coordinated barrel-roll
attacks against the bomber aircraft. When the leader comes out of his roll,
and into the firing position, the wingman may start down. When the leader
slides to a new high position on the target, the wingman will be in the
firing cone, and the cycle just repeats itself.
If the bomber is too high to permit successful employment of the
barrel-roll attack, the fighters have no recourse. They will be forced to
approach the target from below and from the six-o’clock position. If this
tactic must be employed, it behooves the fighters to fire at the extreme
range of the fire control system. Since the bomber is much larger, as
compared to the fighter, their opportunity to secure a lethal burst is
certainly as good if not better – than that of the defending bomber. The
important thing to remember: the bomber must be destroyed, regardless of
the tactics used, or the weapon employed.