SUMMARY
In our discussion of Aerial Attack, we stated that tactics were
developed according to the performance capabilities or limitations of the
weapons system used – our weapons as well as the opponent’s. Recognizing
this we set about to determine the performance parameters of our weapons
systems – the F-100 equipped with AIM-9B and the 20 mm cannon. Study
revealed: To successfully employ AIM-9B, it must be launch within a given
firing envelope. The firing envelope is determined by the radiation pattern
of the target and the performance envelope of the missile. The parameters
of this envelope are determined by, (1) the size of the target’s infra-red
pattern, )2) the range of the missile, (3) G-capability of the missile, and, (4)
AIM-9B lambda limitation. To successfully employ the 20 mm cannon, the
pilot must be within the theoretical capability of the fire control system,
and have control responses precise enough to control this equipment.
We then applied the information provided by this study – the
limitations of AIM-9B and the 20mm cannon, to the pursuit curve, to find
the best attack envelope for each system. We found that the best attack
envelope for AIM-9B is an underside or a six-o’clock-low attack. For 20mm
cannon, we found that the best attack would have to be a

38

barrel-roll attack, combining the characteristics of the pursuit curve and
the collision course. Comparing this information revealed that AIM-9B
is a far superior weapon for a fighter-versus-bomber intercept, since its
firing envelope and resultant attack cone is much greater than is possible
when employing the 20mm cannon. Sidewinder’s main disadvantage, in
a fighter-versus-bomber intercept, is its inability to discriminate target IR
radiation from background IR clutter. This disadvantage can easily result
in the attacker being forced to use the 20mm cannon attack. NOTE: Keep
in mind that the advantage which AIM-9B enjoys over ordinary armament,
in a fighter-versus-bomber attack, is not near as great in a fighter-versusfighter situation. (We will elaborate on this in Part II of this manual.)
Since AIM-9B provides a larger attack cone and a greater capability,
tactics will be predicated upon this advantage. Whether an attacker
approaches the target from the nose-quarter, beam or tail-quarter position,
he will set up to deliver AIM-9B. If conditions preclude missile delivery, he
will press in and employ 20 mm cannon. Before the attacker reaches this
weapon delivery point, he must maneuver through both the vertical and
horizontal planes as it is his responsibility to provide positive guarantee
that individual bombers in a saturation-type strike will be intercepted.
Two-ship scrambles will be employed. If more than two aircraft are used,
the fighter defense is spread too thin. Simply stated, the dictum, “economy
of force” would be violated with little gain in effective combat potential.

39

40