TACTICAL FORMATION
In air-to-air combat, the primary purpose of tactical formation is
two-fold: (1) To provide security against attacks by enemy fighters, and (2)
To conduct offensive operations against enemy bombers and/or fighters.
To gain security, any formation must be able to detect the attack and
maneuver against it before the attackers achieve a lethal position. This
means that the formation must be so constructed that attacking fighters
with air-to-air missiles can be detected before they are within launch
range. At the same time, this formation must possess characteristics of
maneuverability and mutual support so that it can counter the attack
as well as see it. These same characteristics are necessary in conducting
offensive air-to-air operations.
To gain maximum lookout security against a rear-hemisphere
attack, the flight must be so constructed that visual cross-cover is the
maximum attainable. Two means by which a formation can increase its
visual cross-cover are: (1) Increase the number of aircraft within the basic
maneuvering formation, and (2) Place these aircraft line-abreast at definite
intervals to increase the field of cross-cover. By increasing the number of
aircraft, we provide more flight members covering the rear hemisphere.
If we stack the flight line-abreast, we provide greater across-cover, thus
increasing the probability of detection a rear-hemisphere attack. This
means that we increase look-out security but at the same time we decrease
maneuverability. To maximize maneuverability, a flight must consist of
as few members as possible (a single aircraft is more maneuverable than
any formation consisting of more than one aircraft) with these members
stack in-trail. From experience we know that when the number within the
flight is reduced, it becomes easier for the members to keep track of and
avoid one another during any maneuvering engagement. Experience also
indicates it is much easier to maneuver in-trail as opposed to line-abreast
formation.
In order to acquire security and maneuverability, we must
compromise between maximum look-out security and maximum
maneuverability. The extent of the compromise needed will determine the
type formation flown in a fighter-versus-fighter engagement. The increase
range of AIM-9B, as opposed to the 20mm cannon, forces us to construct
a formation in which the compromise favors look-out security. This means
that the formation will be flown very nearly line-abreast at a specified
interval to pick up a missile attack at ranges of greater than 15,000 feet. To
maintain maneuverability and mutual support, the size of the formation
must be restricted to no more than four aircraft. If a number greater than
four is employed, maneuverability and mutual support become difficult
and complicated. On the other hand, if less than two aircraft are employed,
the look-out capability is reduced and mutual support becomes impossible.
Therefore, to provide look-out
112

security and maneuverability, a formation of two, three or four aircraft
must be employed.
The three-ship flight, with a leader and two wingmen, has been
evaluated many times throughout the history of fighter aviation. In spite
of many attempts to propose a three-ship flight as a combat formation, it
has never been extensively employed. The reason is that a tree-ship flight,
with flanking wingmen, provides excellent look-out capability in the rear
hemisphere on a combat air patrol; however, when this formation detects
an attack and maneuvers against it, the result has always been the same
– chaos. The wingmen cannot keep track of and avoid one another while
maneuvering in respect to their leader and their attackers. As a result,
one or the other of the wingmen is forced out of the formation and flight
integrity is broken. The attackers simply drive in and take the single, then
maneuver after the element after having destroyed the single or having
forced him out of the fight. On the attack, where hard combat maneuvering
is necessary, flight integrity disappears just as it did when maneuvering on
the defensive.
As indicated previously, the two-ship formation would be more
maneuverable than any other type we may employ. Our problem in using
this type formation is to provide extensive look-out security in order to
detect a possible missile attack. If we stack the formation line-abreast, we
must provide sufficient interval so the element can detect a missile attack
at ranges greater than 15,000 feet. In order that this may be accomplished,
the flight must spread about 2500 feed apart. A disadvantage of a spread
of this magnitude is quickly apparent. Initial maneuverability is reduced
after detecting the attack in the rear hemisphere. When the missile’s
limitation is known, this maneuverability disadvantage is not as great as
it appears (remember, to defend against a missile attack at long range,
we need angular velocity plus airspeed, not a small turn radius and a low
airspeed). This means that maneuverability is not required to the same
extent as in gun tactics. With this in mind, we can safely accept an initial
maneuverability restriction; however, the real disadvantage of the two-ship
flight concerns look-out security. With only two ships, the leader of this
formation must spend a great deal of time looking to the rear, rather than
looking for enemy targets. In terms of look-out capability, this means a
loss in offensive potential. If this loss can be accepted, along with reduced
initial maneuverability, the two-ship flight may be employed as a basic
maneuvering formation.
To employ the element correctly, without sacrificing maneuverability
beyond initial maneuverability, the wingman must know how to position
himself during all maneuvers. On patrol, prior to initial contact, the
wingman will maintain the position specified above – line-abreast and
about 2500 feet out. During turns, the wingman will play the outside as
well as the inside of the turn, in order to maintain position.

113

This will not be too difficult because the maneuvers executed, prior
to contact, will not be of the maximum-performance variety. To allow the
wingman to easily maintain his position and to provide adequate rearward
coverage, the wingman must maneuver through both the horizontal and
vertical planes. If the leader performs a turn away from the wingman, the
wingman lowers his nose and cuts to the inside. This procedure allows the
wingman to reduce his horizontal turning component and, at the same
time, provides him a rate of closure so he will not be straggling behind his
leader. As the wingman moves inside and low toward the leader’s lineabreast position, he should play his crossover so that he does not cross
in front of his leader. He should cross to the outside, slide high and fly in
the plane of the leader. If this crossover technique is employed during all
turns, the wingman will describe a circular movement in the plane of the
leader’s aircraft, see figure 36. On the outside of this circle the wingman
will lose airspeed and slide to the rear. On the inside, the wingman will
gain airspeed and move forward. In effect, the wingman is employing the
low-speed and the high-speed yo-yo as a means of maintaining position,
and providing sufficient visual cross-coverage. At the same time, this
maneuver will enable the leader to cover his wingman, whether he be on
the outside or on the inside of the turn. If the initial turn by the leader is
toward the wingman, the wingman will be unable to cross over behind and
underneath his leader. In this situation, the wingman must pull up, play
the leader’s turn and cross to the outside, above and behind the plane of
the leader’s aircraft. After the initial crossover, the wingman employs the
techniques specified above for the remainder of his crossovers.
When maneuvers approach maximum performance, the wingman
will be unable to maintain the loose position implied in patrol formation.
He will be forced into a fighting position, in a narrow cone, behind the
leader’s aircraft. In order to remain with the leader and, at the same time,
provide rearward coverage he will be forced to assume a position closer
to the tail of the leader’s aircraft. As we define it, the fighting position is
any place within a 60° cone with the wingman approximately 1000 feet
behind the leader. To maintain position in this cone, the wingman employs
the same maneuvering techniques which he used in patrol formation.
(He maneuvers through both the vertical and horizontal planes). During
max maneuvers, if the wingman attempts to maneuver very much outside
the confines of this cone, he will find it difficult to maintain position and
also provide rearward visual coverage. The primary duty of the wingman
while in fighting position is to provide visual coverage to the rear, while
the leader is concentrating on maneuvering for an advantage. This is of
extreme importance if the enemy is equipped with air-to-air missiles.
Considering all factors, a two-ship is better than a three-ship formation.
Although a two-ship element has an initial look-out disadvantage, while in
patrol formation, it has a distinct maneuvering advantage, and a somewhat
better look-out advantage while fighting as a basic formation.

114

Figure 36

115

MANEUVERING IN THE FIGHTING POSITION

When employed properly, the four-ship flight will give us all-around
advantages in look-out, maneuverability and mutual support. To acquire
these advantages without sacrificing one for the other, a flight of four
must consist of two mutually-supporting elements. When on patrol, the
elements should fly line-abreast from five to seven thousand feet apart.
The wingman should maintain a position from line-abreast to no more
than 20° back, at approximately 1500 feed out from the respective element
leaders. A formation spread in this manner provides excellent look-out
capability, because the wingmen can provide mutual crossover at ranges
in excess of 15,000 feet. Maneuverability in this formation is somewhat
restricted, When the lead element turns away from the second element,
the second element will experience considerable difficulty in regaining a
line-abreast position, unless the turn is held for almost 180°. If the lead
element turns into the second elements, the second element will be forced
to pull up and cross above the lead element. If this is not done, the second
element will be forced to cross in front of the lead. In either case, if the turn
is less than 90°, the second element will experience considerable difficulty
in regaining a line-abreast position. To provide more maneuverability and
flexibility, the second element must be given a greater field of maneuver.
This field of maneuver should enable the second element to easily position
itself, no matter what type of turn is performed by the lead element. A
method of providing this freedom of maneuver is to spread the second
element in both the vertical and horizontal planes. When this is done, if the
lead element turns away, the second element can lower its nose, cut across
the inside and quickly reposition itself, even though the lead element does
not perform 90° or 180° turns. On turns into the second element, the
second element can maneuver well above the lead element without fear of
dragging the wingman through one another (remember wingmen will be
maneuvering through both the vertical and horizontal planes to maintain
position not their respective leaders). The freedom of maneuver provided
the second element leader enables him to devote less time to flying
formation and more time to looking for prospective kills. At the same time,
during turns, it allows the wingman to provide better rearward coverage,
because the elements will not be strung out in extended-train. The only
real objection to this formation is that, in straight-away flight, the second
element must look through a greater distance to detect a missile attack
against the lead element. Although this is true, it can be mathematically
demonstrated that the additional distance through which both elements
must look, is insignificant: (Less than 300’ against a six-o’clock attacker
if the fluid element is stacked vertically less than 3000’ above the lead
element). If the attack is directed from six-o’clock-low, the additional
distance through which the second element must look is somewhat greater.
However, the attackers must get in considerably closer along the horizontal
plane before initiating a pull-up into an underside attack. This means that
the second element will be afforded more of a plane view of the attackers,
thus a large target in perspective even though the additional distance is
somewhat greater. Another reason cited for not
116

using the high element is the fact that the aircraft wing covers a
considerable portion of the highly vulnerable six-o’clock-low attack area.
This is true for both the high element and the level-stacked element. To
surmount this difficulty, wingmen simply dip their wings occasionally to
enable them to cover the vulnerable rear area.
In view of the maneuverability advantage offered by the fluid-four
type formation (the formation in which the second element is stacked both
horizontally and vertically) without significant look-out disadvantage,
we consider it the best combat patrol formation. In fluid-four, the second
or fluid element should be line-abreast, 5,000 to 7,000 feet out, and
approximately 2,000 feet above the lead element. As in a normal tactical
formation, the wingman will maintain a position from line-abreast to 20°
back and 1500 feet out to the side opposite the other element see figure 37.
As indicated in the two-ship flight, the wingman will fly the vertical as well
as the horizontal plane in order to maintain their respective positions. On
patrol, the fluid element leader will maintain position on the lead element
by flying through the vertical and horizontal plane during all turns and
maneuvers. For a fighting position, the fluid element must operate as
an independent unit during violent maneuvers in fighter-versus fighter
engagements (the reason for this will become apparent when we discuss
flight tactics).
If the tactical situation indicates that not enough aircraft are available
for area saturation with four-ship flights do not employ the fluid-four
formation. Instead, use individual elements as basic patrol formations and
as basic fighting formations. Although not as decisive as the four-ship
flight in terms of look-out capability, maneuverability and mutual support,
the two-ship flight will be much more effective than the three-ship flight.
The only real advantage which a flight of four has over an element is initial
look-out capability and initial mutual support. After the engagement is
entered, the fluid-four, or the four-ship flight will become nothing more
than individual fighting elements. If suitable tail-warning radar devices
were available, four-ship flights would enjoy very little advantage over
individual fighting elements in terms of combat capability. The dictum,
“economy of force” would most certainly prevail. Tactical formation in
fighter-versus-fighter engagements would probably be dominated by the
element or even possibly the single ship. Without this needed radar gear, a
four-ship flight is the best all-around tactical formation.
Three factors to consider when employing either the fluid-four or the
element in combat or on a combat patrol are: (1) look-out capability, (2)
maneuverability, and (3) fuel management. In the era of missile-equipped
supersonic fighters with afterburner, these factors determine the best
altitude for patrol in order to enter a given flight-versus-flight engagement.
If the patrol is conducted at extreme altitudes (40,000 feet or above) the
look-out problem becomes a liability which increases as altitude increases.
The advantage of
117

Figure 37

118
FLUID FOUR FORMATION

firing an air-to-air missile at greater range against a given defender
is nullified by the possibility of an enemy attacker enjoying the same
advantage. In addition, extreme altitude provides a maneuverability
disadvantage in terms of indicated maneuvering airspeed. At extreme
altitude, fuel management may be an advantage in some aircraft while in
others (F-100) it can be a disadvantage. If the patrol is conducted at very
low altitudes (10,000 feet or below) the look-out problem is considerably
reduced and maneuverability, in terms of maneuvering airspeed, is
certainly increased. However, this maneuverability is nullified somewhat
by the fact that maneuvering becomes more restricted to the horizontal
plane as opposed to the vertical plane. At very low altitudes, good fuel
management is not possible with present-day jet engines and afterburners.
The optimum altitudes, considering all three factors – look-out capability,
maneuverability and fuel management – for patrolling and entering
a fighter-versus-fighter engagement are the middle altitudes between
25,000 and 35,000 feet (even this is open for argument if one considers the
possibility of surface-to-air missiles). The exact altitudes will depend upon
look-out capability and maneuverability of the fighters employed. In the
F-100, the best all-around altitude seems to be approximately 30,000 feet.
At this altitude, maneuverability and fuel management are excellent. At the
same time the look-out problem can be easily handled by a flight of four
and handled adequately by an element. If the tactical situation dictates that
elements must be employed, an altitude somewhere between 25,000 and
30,000 feet might be more appropriate to reduce the look-out problem. In
any case, the medium altitudes provide a position from which an attack
may be launch against aircraft at very high or very low altitudes.
Procedures for Flying Element Formation
1. Flying the Position of Wingman in Patrol Formation.
a. Maintain a patrol position off the leader’s wing by flying lineabreast at approximately 2,500 feet out when in straight-and-level flight. If
you fly closer, look-out capability will be sacrificed. If you fly further out,
initial maneuverability as well as final maneuverability will be sacrificed
after initial contact with the enemy.
b. Play the outside as well as the inside of the turn for mutual
coverage. If an attempt is made to stay on the inside of the turn without a
crossover, you will only fall back when the leader rolls out of his turn.
c. Maneuver through both the vertical and horizontal planes in order
to fly a relative position off the leader. While on the inside of the turn, you
will be in an extended-low position. On the outside of the turn, you will be
in an extended-high position in the plane of the leader’s aircraft.

119

d. Lower your nose and cross to the inside if you are on the outside
of the turn. If you are on the inside, sliding forward, cross to the outside
then slide high and fly in the plane of the leader. If the initial turn is into
you, pull up, cross over and behind your leader, then cross from outside
to inside and vice versa in the manner just discussed. This technique will
cause you to describe a circular movement in the plane of the leader’s
aircraft. You will be moving forward in the bottom half of the circle and
backward in the top half. This will enable you to easily maintain position
and provide mutual coverage during the entire turn.
e. Do not cross in front of your leader. Always maintain nose-tail
separation.
2. Flying the Fighting Position as a Wingman in Element Formation
a. Fly in a 60° cone, in a fighting position, about 1,000 feet back.
b. Maneuver through both the horizontal and vertical planes to
maintain position. Slide high when overshooting and drop low when
falling back, in order to maintain position on the leader.
c. Attempt to keep your fuselage aligned with your leader’s during
all maneuvers. This will enable you to match your leader’s maximum
performance and will prevent you from becoming separated.
d. Attempt to stay out of the in-trail position as much as possible. By
doing this, the leader may cover you more adequately.
Procedures for Flying the Fluid-Four Patrol
1. Flying Position of Fluid Element Leader
a. Position the element, line-abreast, about 5,000 to 7,000 feet out and
approximately 2,000 feet above the lead element.
b. Maintain a relative position to your leader during turns. If you are
on the outside of the turn, drop your nose and cross to the other side when
you find yourself losing out and falling back. When being turned into, and
you find yourself creeping forward, slide high and/or cross to the outside
of the turn to maintain position. In other words, play the vertical as well as
the horizontal plane in order to maintain supporting position.
c. Lower your nose to gain airspeed and position when you find
yourself too far back after rolling out of a turn. When you regain your
forward position you may pull back to the original fluid position.

120

d. Pull your nose up and kill off airspeed if you find yourself too far
forward after rolling out of a turn. You may also retard throttle, however
this is not advised when at altitude. When you regain your correct relative
position, lower the nose to maintain proper vertical separation. All
maneuvers must be smooth to prevent over-correction.
e. Bank from side to side and look below when crossing from the
inside high to the outside of the lead element. This will prevent you from
losing the lead element during crossovers.
f. Cover the forward hemisphere, along with the flight leader, as
primary responsibility in an effort to visually acquire a target so that an
attack may be launched against it. As a secondary responsibility, cover
the rear hemisphere behind the lead element in order to detect a possible
missile attack.
2. Flying Position of Wingman in Fluid-Four Patrol
a. Maintain a position from line-abreast to 20° back and 1500 feet out
on the side opposite the element.
b. Maneuver through both the horizontal and vertical planes to
maintain position during turns. Fly high when overshooting and drop low
to the inside when falling back.
c. Cover the rear hemisphere, behind the other element, at all times.
This is your responsibility and your coverage is necessary to detect any
possible missile attacks. Your opposite number in the other element, will be
providing you the same coverage.

121